Introduction: 
How, When and Where
1
How Important are Dates?
There was a time when historians were 
fascinated with dates. There were heated 
debates about the dates on which rulers 
were crowned or battles were fought. In 
the common-sense notion, history was 
synonymous with dates. You may have 
heard people say, “I find history boring 
because it is all about memorising 
dates.” Is such a conception true?
History is certainly about changes 
that occur over time. It is about 
finding out how things were in the 
past and how things have changed. 
As soon as we compare the past with 
the present, we refer to time, we talk of 
“before” and “after”. 
Living in the world we do not always 
ask historical questions about what 
we see around us. We take things for 
granted, as if what we see has always 
been in the world we inhabit. But most of 
us have our moments of wonder, when we are 
curious, and we ask questions that actually are historical. 
Watching someone sip a cup of tea at a roadside tea stall, 
you may wonder – when did people begin to drink tea or 
coffee? Looking out of the window of a train you may ask 
yourself – when were railways built and how did people 
travel long distances before the age of railways? Reading 
the newspaper in the morning you may be curious to know 
how people got to hear about things before newspapers 
began to be printed.  
Fig. 1 – Brahmans offering the 
Shastras to Britannia, frontispiece 
to the first map produced by 
James Rennel, 1782
Rennel was asked by Robert Clive 
to produce maps of Hindustan. 
An enthusiastic supporter 
of British conquest of India, 
Rennel saw preparation of maps 
as essential to the process of 
domination. The picture here 
tries to suggest that Indians 
willingly gave over their ancient 
texts to Britannia – the symbol of 
British power – as if asking her 
to become the protector of Indian 
culture.
Activity
Look carefully at Fig.1 and write a paragraph explaining 
how this image projects an imperial perception.

Reprint 2024-25

2	
OUR PASTS – III
All such historical questions refer us back to 
notions of time. But time does not have to be always 
precisely dated in terms of a particular year or a month. 
Sometimes it is actually incorrect to fix precise dates 
to processes that happen over a period of time. People 
in India did not begin drinking tea one fine day; they 
developed a taste for it over time. There can be no 
one clear date for a process such as this. Similarly, 
we cannot fix one single date on which British rule 
was established, or the national movement started, or 
changes took place within the economy and society. All 
these things happened over a stretch of time. We can 
only refer to a span of time, an approximate period over 
which particular changes became visible.
Why, then, do we continue to associate history with 
a string of dates? This association has a reason. There 
was a time when history was an account of battles and big 
events. It was about rulers and their policies. Historians 
wrote about the year a king was crowned, the year he 
married, the year he had a child, the year he fought a 
particular war, the year he died, and the year the next 
ruler succeeded to the throne. For events such as these, 
specific dates can be determined, and in histories such 
as these, debates about dates continue to be important. 
As you have seen in the history textbooks of the past 
two years, historians now write about a host of other 
issues, and other questions. They look at how people 
earned their livelihood, what they produced and ate, how 
cities developed and markets came up, how kingdoms 
were formed and new ideas spread, and how cultures 
and society changed.
Which dates?
By what criteria do we choose a set of dates as 
important? The dates we select, the dates around which 
we compose our story of the past, are not important 
on their own. They become vital because we focus on 
a particular set of events as important. If our focus of 
study changes, if we begin to look at new issues, a new 
set of dates will appear significant. 
Consider an example. In the histories written by 
British historians in India, the rule of each Governor-
General was important. These histories began with the 
rule of the first Governor-General, Warren Hastings, 
and ended with the last Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten. In 
separate chapters, we read about the deeds of others —
Hastings, Wellesley, Bentinck, Dalhousie, Canning, 
Fig. 2 – Advertisements help 
create taste
Old advertisements help us 
understand how markets for new 
products were created and new 
tastes were popularised. This 
1922 advertisement for Lipton tea 
suggests that royalty all over the 
world is associated with this tea. 
In the background you see the 
outer wall of an Indian palace, 
while in the foreground, seated 
on horseback is the third son of 
Queen Victoria of Britain, Prince 
Arthur, who was given the title 
Duke of Connaught.
Reprint 2024-25

INTRODUCTION: HOW, WHEN AND WHERE         3
Lawrence, Lytton, Ripon, Curzon, Harding, Irwin. It 
was a seemingly never-ending succession of Governor- 
Generals and Viceroys. All the dates in these history books 
were linked to these personalities – to their activities, 
policies and achievements. It was as if there was nothing 
outside their lives that was important for us to know. The 
chronology of their lives marked the different chapters of 
the history of British India. 
Can we not write about the history of this period in a 
different way? How do we focus on the activities of different 
groups and classes in Indian society within the format of 
this history of Governor-Generals? 
When we write history, or a story, we divide it into 
chapters. Why do we do this? It is to give each chapter 
some coherence. It is to tell a story in a way that makes 
some sense and can be followed. In the process we focus 
only on those events that help us to give shape to the story 
we are telling. In the histories that revolve around the life 
of British Governor-Generals, the activities of Indians 
simply do not fit, they have no space. What, then, do we 
do? Clearly, we need another format for our history. This 
would mean that the old dates will no longer have the 
significance they earlier had. A new set of dates will become 
more important for us to know.  
How do we periodise? 
In 1817, James Mill, a Scottish economist and political 
philosopher, published a massive three-volume work, 
A History of British India. In this, he divided Indian 
history into three periods – Hindu, Muslim and British. 
This periodisation came to be widely accepted. Can 
you think of any problem with this way of looking at 
Indian history?
Why do we try and divide history into different periods? 
We do so in an attempt to capture the characteristics of 
a time, its central features as they appear to us. So the 
terms through which we periodise – that is, demarcate 
the difference between periods – become important. They 
reflect our ideas about the past. They show how we see 
the significance of the change from one period to the next. 
Mill thought that all Asian societies were at a lower 
level of civilisation than Europe. According to  his telling 
of history, before the British came to India, Hindu and 
Muslim despots ruled the country. Religious intolerance, 
caste taboos and superstitious practices dominated 
social life. British rule, Mill felt, could civilise India. To do 
Fig. 3 – Warren Hastings became 
the first Governor-General in 1773
While history books narrated 
the deeds of Governor-Generals, 
biographies glorified them as 
persons, and paintings projected 
them as powerful figures. 
Interview your mother 
or another member of 
your family to find out 
about their life. Now 
divide their life into 
different periods and 
list out the significant 
events in each period.  
Explain the basis of your 
periodisation.
Activity

Reprint 2024-25

4	
OUR PASTS – III
this, it was necessary to introduce European manners, arts, 
institutions and laws in India. Mill, in fact, suggested that the 
British should conquer all the territories in India to ensure 
the enlightenment and happiness of the Indian people. For 
India was not capable of progress without British help.
In this idea of history, British rule represented all the forces 
of progress and civilisation. The period before British rule was 
one of darkness. Can such a conception be accepted today?
In any case, can we refer to any period of history as “Hindu” 
or “Muslim”? Did not a variety of faiths exist simultaneously 
in these periods? Why should we characterise an age only 
through the religion of the rulers of the time? To do so is to 
suggest that the lives and practices of the others do not really 
matter. We should also remember that even rulers in ancient 
India did not all share the same faith.
Moving away from British classification, historians 
have usually divided Indian history into ‘ancient’, ‘medieval’ 
and ‘modern’. This division too has its problems. It is a 
periodisation that is borrowed from the West where the 
modern period was associated with the growth of all the 
forces of modernity – science, reason, democracy, liberty 
and equality. Medieval was a term used to describe a society 
where these features of modern society did not exist. Can 
we uncritically accept this characterisation of the modern 
period to describe the period of our study? As you will see in 
this book, under British rule people did not have equality, 
freedom or liberty. Nor was the period one of economic 
growth and progress.
Many historians therefore refer to this period as ‘colonial’. 
What is colonial? 
In this book, you will read about the way the British came 
to conquer the country and establish their rule, subjugating 
local nawabs and rajas. You will see how they established 
control over the economy and society, collected revenue to 
meet all their expenses, bought the goods they wanted at low 
prices, produced crops they needed for export, and you will 
understand the changes that came about as a consequence. 
You will also come to know about the changes British rule 
brought about in values and tastes, customs and practices. 
When the subjugation of one country by another leads to these 
kinds of political, economic, social and cultural changes, we 
refer to the process as colonisation. 
You will, however, find that all classes and groups did not 
experience these changes in the same way. That is why, the 
book is called Our Pasts in the plural.
Reprint 2024-25

INTRODUCTION: HOW, WHEN AND WHERE         5
How do We Know?
What sources do historians use in writing about the last 
250 years of Indian history? 
Administration produces records
One important source is the official records of the British 
administration. The British believed that the act of writing 
was important. Every instruction, plan, policy decision, 
agreement, investigation had to be clearly written up. Once 
this was done, things could be properly studied and debated. 
This conviction produced an administrative culture of 
memos, notings and reports. 
The British also felt that all important documents 
and letters needed to be carefully preserved. So they 
set up record rooms attached to all administrative 
institutions. The village tahsildar’s office, the collectorate, 
the commissioner’s office, the provincial secretariats, 
the lawcourts – all had their record rooms. Specialised 
institutions like archives and museums were also 
established to preserve important records.
Letters and memos that moved from one branch 
of the administration to another in the early years 
of the nineteenth century can still be read in the 
archives. You can also study the notes and reports 
that district officials prepared, or the instructions 
and directives that were sent by officials at the top to 
provincial administrators. 
In the early years of the nineteenth century, these 
documents were carefully copied out and beautifully 
written by calligraphists – that is, by those who specialised 
in the art of beautiful writing. By the middle of the 
nineteenth century, with the spread of printing, multiple 
copies of these records were printed as proceedings of each 
government department. 
Source 1
Reports to the  
Home Department
In 1946 the colonial 
government in India was 
trying to put down a mutiny 
that broke out on the ships 
of the Royal Indian Navy. 
Here is a sample of the 
kind of reports the Home 
Department got from the 
different dockyards:
Bombay: Arrangements 
have been made for the 
Army to take over ships 
and establishment. Royal 
Navy ships are remaining 
outside the harbour.
Karachi: 301 mutineers 
are under arrest and a few 
more strongly suspected 
are to be arrested … All 
establishments … are 
under military guard.
Vizagapatnam: 
The 
positionis 
completely 
under control and no 
violence has occurred. 
Military guards have 
been placed on ships 
and 
establishments.
No further trouble is 
expected except that 
a few men may refuse 
to work.
Director of Intelligence, HQ. India 
Command, Situation Report No. 7. 
File No. 5/21/46 Home (Political), 
Government of India
Fig. 4 – The National Archives of India came up in the 1920s
When New Delhi was built, the National Museum and the National 
Archives were both located close to the Viceregal Palace. This location 
reflects the importance these institutions had in British imagination.
Reprint 2024-25

6	
OUR PASTS – III
Surveys become important
The practice of surveying also became common under 
the colonial administration. The British believed that 
a country had to be properly known before it could be 
effectively administered. 
By the early nineteenth century, detailed surveys 
were being carried out to map the entire country.  In 
the villages, revenue surveys were conducted. The 
effort was to know the topography, the soil quality, 
the flora, the fauna, the local histories, and the 
cropping pattern – all the facts seen as necessary 
to know about to administer the region. From the 
end of the nineteenth century, Census operations 
were held every ten years. These prepared detailed 
records of the number of people in all the provinces 
of India, noting information on castes, religions and 
occupation. There were many other surveys – botanical 
surveys, zoological surveys, archaeological surveys, 
anthropological surveys, forest surveys. 
What official records do not tell
From this vast corpus of records we can get to know 
a lot, but we must remember that these are official 
records. They tell us what the officials thought, what 
Fig. 6 – Mapping and survey operations in progress in Bengal, a drawing by James Prinsep, 1832
Note how all the instruments that were used in surveys are placed in the foreground to 
emphasise the scientific nature of the project.
Fig. 5 – A 
custard-apple 
plant, 1770s
Botanical gardens 
and natural history 
museums established by the 
British collected plant specimens 
and information about their 
uses. Local artists were asked to 
draw pictures of these specimens. 
Historians are now looking 
at the way such information 
was gathered and what this 
information reveals about the 
nature of colonialism.
Reprint 2024-25

INTRODUCTION: HOW, WHEN AND WHERE         7
they were interested in, and what they wished to preserve 
for posterity. These records do not always help us 
understand what other people in the country felt, and what 
lay behind their actions. 
For that we need to look elsewhere. When we begin to 
search for these other sources, we find them in plenty, 
though they are more difficult to get than official records. 
We have diaries of people, accounts of pilgrims and 
travellers, autobiographies of important personalities, and 
popular booklets that were sold in the local bazaars. As 
printing spread, newspapers were published and issues 
were debated in public. Leaders and reformers wrote to 
spread their ideas, poets and novelists wrote to express 
their feelings. 
All these sources, however, were produced by those who 
were literate. From these, we will not be able to understand 
how history was experienced and lived by the tribals and 
the peasants, the workers in the mines or the poor on the 
streets. Getting to know their lives is a more difficult task. 
Yet this can be done, if we make a little bit of effort. 
When you read this book, you will see how this can 
be done. 
Fig. 7 – The rebels of 1857
Images need to be carefully studied for they project the viewpoint 
of those who create them. This image can be found in several 
illustrated books produced by the British after the 1857 rebellion. 
The caption at the bottom says: “Mutinous sepoys share the loot”. 
In British representations, the rebels appear as greedy, vicious and 
brutal. You will read about the rebellion in Chapter 5. 
“Not fit for human 
consumption”
Newspapers provide 
accounts of the movements 
in different parts of the 
country. Here is a report 
of  a  police strike in 1946.
More 
than 
2000 
policemen in Delhi 
refused to take their 
food on Thursday 
morning as a protest 
against 
their 
low 
salaries 
and 
the 
bad quality of food 
supplied 
to 
them 
from the Police Lines 
kitchen.
As the news spread 
to the other police 
stations, 
the 
men 
there also refused to 
take food … One of 
the strikers said: “The 
food supplied to us 
from the Police Lines 
kitchen is not fit for 
human consumption. 
Even 
cattle 
would 
not eat the chappattis 
and dal which we 
have to eat.”
Hindustan Times,                 
22 March, 1946
Source 2
Look at Sources 1 and 2. 
Do you find any 
differences in the nature 
of reporting? Explain 
what you observed.
Activity

Reprint 2024-25

8	
OUR PASTS – III
 Let’s recall
	 1. 	State whether true or false:
	
(a)	 James Mill divided Indian history into three 	
	
	 periods – Hindu, Muslim, Christian.
	
(b)	 Official documents help us understand what 	
	
	 the people of the country think.
	
(c)	 The British thought surveys were important 	
	
	 for effective administration.
Let’s discuss
	 2. 	What is the problem with the periodisation of Indian 
	
	 history that James Mill offers?
	 3. 	Why did the British preserve official documents?
	 4. 	How will the information historians get from old 	
	
	 newspapers be different from that found in police 	
	
	 reports? 
Let’s do
5. 	Can you think of examples of surveys in your 
world today? Think about how toy companies get 
information about what young people enjoy playing 
with or how the government finds out about the 
number of young people in school. What can a 
historian derive from such surveys? 
Let’s imagine
Imagine that you are a 
historian wanting  to 
find out about  how 
agriculture changed 
in a remote tribal area 
after independence. 
List the different ways 
in which you would 
find information on 
this. 
Reprint 2024-25
