Social and Political Life
2
Unit One
2024-25

3
Teacher’s Note
The Indian Constitution has been regularly referred to in the previous two Social and Political Life
textbooks. Unlike the previous two books, where little space was devoted to discussing the
Constitution itself, this year the chapters in Unit 1 take the Constitution as its main focus.
Chapter 1 begins with a discussion of the principles that underlie a liberal constitution. Three short
storyboards have been used to familiarise the student with the ideas that are being discussed.
The storyboards use incidents located within a classroom-setting to illustrate three complex
constitutive principles. The storyboards should be used to aid the student’s understanding of these
constitutive principles.
The discussion on the Indian Constitution is situated within a historical context. This has been done
with the express intent that students become aware of the major influence that our anti-colonial
struggle had on Indian democracy. In discussing the Constitution, we have had to use several new, and
often difficult terms, to explain certain key features. While teaching these, please keep in mind that
the student will continue to study these key features in greater depth in higher classes. Therefore, the
attempt here is to familiarise the student with a very basic understanding of the significance of these
features within the working of democracy in India.
Chapter 2 discusses secularism. The most prevalent definition of secularism is that it refers to the
separation between Religion and the State. The chapter uses this definition as the foundation and
then proceeds to elucidate two complicated ideas: the first points to why this separation is important
and the second to what is particular to Indian secularism.
There are two main reasons why the separation between Religion and State is important. The first
is to prevent the domination of one religion over another, i.e. inter-religious domination. The second
is to oppose the various types of domination that can happen within a religion, i.e. intra-religious
domination. For example, the chapter discusses untouchability in Hindu religious practice which
allowed ‘upper castes’ to dominate members of some ‘lower castes’. Secularism’s opposition to
institutionalised religion means that it promotes freedom and equality between and within religions.
The second major conceptual idea that the chapter deals with is the unique nature of Indian
secularism. Indian secularism does protect the religious freedom of individuals by maintaining a
separation from religion. But it also provides room for the reform of religions, for example, the
abolishing of untouchability, child marriage, etc. Therefore, in its attempt to achieve religious equality
(both between as well as within religions) the Indian secular State both maintains a separation as
well as intervenes in religion. This intervention can either be in terms of a ban (like that on
untouchability) or in terms of providing assistance to religious minorities. The chapter explains this
and refers to it as ‘principled distance’. This means that any interference in religion by the State has
to be based on the ideals laid out in the Constitution.
Several of the above points are quite complex. It is crucial that you understand these points clearly
before teaching this chapter. It is very likely that students will come up with several suggestions for
why the government should intervene or not intervene in religious affairs. While discussion is to be
encouraged, it is important to mediate this and ensure that it does not reinforce stereotypes of
religious minorities.
The Indian Constitution
and Secularism
2024-25

Social and Political Life
4
In this chapter, we are going to begin with football, a
game many of you have probably heard of, or even
played. As the name suggests, this is a game that involves
the players’ feet. According to the rules of football, if
the ball touches the arm of any player (except the
goalkeeper), then this is considered a foul. So if players
start holding the football in their hands and passing it
around, then they are not playing football any more.
Similarly other games, such as hockey or cricket, also
have rules according to which they are played. Each of
these rules helps define the game, and helps us
distinguish one game from another. As these are
fundamental to the game, we can also call them the
constitutive rules of the game. Like these games, a
society also has constitutive rules that make it what it
is and differentiate it from other kinds of societies. In
large societies in which different communities of people
live together, these rules are formulated through
consensus, and in modern countries this consensus is
usually available in written form. A written document
in which we find such rules is called a Constitution.
We have looked at the Indian Constitution in Classes VI
and VII in our Social and Political Life textbooks. Have
you ever wondered why we need a Constitution or been
curious about how the Constitution got written, or who
wrote it? In this chapter, we will discuss both these
issues and also look at the key features of the Indian
Constitution. Each of these features is crucial to the
working of democracy in India and some of these will
be the focus of different chapters in this book.
Chapter 1
The
Indian Constitution
2024-25

5
The Indian Constitution
Today most countries in the world have a Constitution.
While all democratic countries are likely to have a
Constitution, it is not necessary that all countries that have
a Constitution are democratic. The Constitution serves
several purposes. First, it lays out certain ideals that form
the basis of the kind of country that we as citizens aspire to
live in. Or, put another way, a Constitution tells us what
the fundamental nature of our society is. A country is
usually made up of different communities of people who
share certain beliefs but may not necessarily agree on all
issues. A Constitution helps serve as a set of rules and
principles that all persons in a country can agree upon as
the basis of the way in which they want the country to be
governed. This includes not only the type of government
but also an agreement on certain ideals that they all believe
the country should uphold.
Why Does a Country Need a Constitution?
In 1934, the Indian National Congress made
the demand for a Constituent Assembly.
During the Second World War, this assertion
for an independent Constituent Assembly
formed only of Indians gained momentum
and this was convened in December 1946.
The photo on page 2 shows some members
of the Constituent Assembly.
Between December 1946 and November
1949, the Constituent Assembly drafted a
constitution for independent India. Free to
shape their destiny at last, after 150 years
of British rule, the members of the
Constituent Assembly approached this task
with the great idealism that the freedom
struggle had helped produce. You will read
more about the work of the Constituent
Assembly later in the chapter.
The photo alongside shows Prime Minister
Jawaharlal Nehru addressing the
Constituent Assembly.
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
2024-25

Social and Political Life
6
Let us try and understand what we mean by this through two
contrasting situations in the recent history of Nepal, a country
that borders India on the north. Until recently, Nepal was a
monarchy. The previous Constitution of Nepal, which had been
adopted in 1990, reflected the fact that the final authority rested
with the King. A people’s movement in Nepal fought for several
decades to establish democracy and in 2006 they finally
succeeded in putting an end to the powers of the King. The
people had to write a new Constitution to establish Nepal as a
democracy. The reason that they did not want to continue with
the previous Constitution is because it did not reflect the ideals
of the country that they want Nepal to be, and that they have
fought for.
As in the game of football, in which a change in the constitutive
rules will change the game altogether, Nepal, by moving from a
monarchy to a democratic government, needs to change all its
constitutive rules in order to usher in a new society. This is why,
the people of Nepal adopted a new Constitution for the country
in 2015. The caption alongside elaborates Nepal’s struggle for
democracy.
The second important purpose of a Constitution is to define
the nature of a country’s political system. For example, Nepal’s
Discuss with your teacher what
you understand by the term
‘constitutive’. Provide one
example of ‘constitutive rules’
from your everyday life.
Why did the people of Nepal
want a new Constitution?
The country of Nepal has witnessed several
people’s struggles for democracy. There was a
people’s struggle in 1990 that established
democracy that lasted for 12 years until
2002. In October 2002, King Gyanendra,
citing the Maoist uprising in the countryside as
his reason, began taking over different aspects
of the government with the army’s assistance.
The King then finally took over as the head of
government in February 2005. In November
2005, the Maoists joined other political parties
to sign a 12-point agreement. This agreement
signalled to the larger public an imminent return
to democracy and peace. In 2006, this
people’s movement for democracy began
gaining immense force. It repeatedly refused
the small concessions that the King made and
finally in April 2006 the King restored the Third
Parliament and asked the political parties to
form a government. In 2008, Nepal became a
democracy after abolishing the monarchy. The
above photos show scenes from the people’s
movement for democracy in 2006.
2024-25

7
In democratic societies, the Constitution often lays down
rules that guard against this misuse of authority by our
political leaders. In the case of the Indian Constitution,
about which you will read more later in this chapter, many
of these laws are contained in the section on Fundamental
Rights. You read about how the Indian Constitution
guarantees the right to equality to all persons and says that
no citizen can be discriminated against on grounds of
religion, race, caste, gender, and place of birth. The Right
to Equality is one of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed
by the Indian Constitution.
earlier Constitution stated that the country was to be ruled by
the King and his council of ministers. In countries that have
adopted a democratic form of government or polity, the
Constitution plays a crucial role in laying out certain important
guidelines that govern decision-making within these societies.
In a democracy, we choose our leaders so that they can exercise
power responsibly on our behalf. However, there is always the
possibility that these leaders might misuse their authority and
the Constitution usually provides safeguards against this. This
misuse of authority can result in gross injustice as demonstrated
in the classroom situation below:
1. In what way is the class monitor
misusing his power?
2. In which of the following situations
is a minister misusing his power:
a) refuses to sanction a project of his
ministry for sound technical reasons;
b) threatens to send his security staff
to rough up his neighbour;
c) calls up the police station asking
them not to register a complaint that
is likely to be filed against his relative.
Suresh is the class monitor. He is a
bully. His classmates are not too fond
of him. Mrs Rao, the class teacher, has
to leave the classroom on some urgent
work. She asks Suresh to mind the class.
Suresh starts picking on Anil.
When Mrs Rao returns to the class …
Ma’am, while you were away,
Anil kept talking loudly and
disturbing the class. He would
not listen to me.
Anil, you will have to
stay back after school
today and write ‘I will
not disobey the class
monitor’ a 100 times.
But … Ma’am … I
did not do anything!
Anil, today I am going to
report you to Mrs Rao.
But what have I done?
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
2024-25

Social and Political Life
8
Such unhealthy situations can occur in democratic
societies too, where a majority can continuously
enforce decisions that exclude minorities and go
against their interests. As the above storyboard
illustrates, every society is prone to this tyranny of
the majority. The Constitution usually contains rules
that ensure that minorities are not excluded from
anything that is routinely available to the majority.
Another reason why we have a Constitution is
precisely to prevent this tyranny or domination by
the majority of a minority. This can refer to one
community dominating another, i.e. inter-community
domination, or members of one community
dominating others within the same community, i.e.
intra-community domination.
Another important function that a Constitution plays in a
democracy is to ensure that a dominant group does not use
its power against other, less powerful people or groups. The
storyboard below demonstrates one such situation in the
classroom.
Who is in a minority in the
above storyboard? In what way
is this minority being
dominated by the decision
taken by the majority?
The teacher decides to settle the
problem with a show of  hands.
The games period is about to begin.
No! We will
play cricket.
Let’s play basketball
today, for a change!
We always have to
do what the boys
want because they
are in a majority.
Ma’am should think of
another way to make
decisions, so that our
wishes are also heard.
Obviously! There are
more boys in the class.
Hee! Hee!
We’ve won!
We’ve won!
2024-25

9
Similarly, the Constitution helps to protect us against
certain decisions that we might take that could have an
adverse effect on the larger principles that the country
believes in. For example, it is possible that many people
who live in a democracy might come to strongly feel that
party politics has become so acrimonious that we need a
strong dictator to set this right. Swept by this emotion,
they may not realise that in the long run, dictatorial rule
goes against all their interests. A good Constitution does
not allow these whims to change its basic structure. It does
not allow for the easy overthrow of provisions that
guarantee rights of citizens and protect their freedom.
From the above discussion, you will understand that the
Constitution plays a very important role in democratic
societies.
The third significant reason why we need a Constitution
is to save us from ourselves. This may sound strange but
what is meant by this is that we might at times feel  strongly
about an issue that might go against our larger interests
and the Constitution helps us guard against this. Look at
the storyboard below to understand this better:
Why was Shabnam happy that
she had not watched TV? What
would you have done in a
similar situation?
Shabnam is in a fix. She has a decision to make.
It’s a good thing I did not
watch TV. There are so many
questions from the last two
chapters.
I have two chapters left to revise for
tomorrow’s test. But it’s time for my favourite
TV programme. I’m dying to watch it. But if I do
that, I won’t have time to finish my revision.
Shabnam, why
are you looking
so worried?
I want to
watch this
TV programme
but I have a
test tomorrow.
If you all
watch TV, I
will also
want to
watch. I have
an idea.
What if no
one watches
TV tonight?
Then I may
not be
tempted.
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
2024-25

Social and Political Life
10
Now let us try and understand the ways in which the above
points get translated into certain ideals and rules by
studying some key features of the Indian Constitution.
The Indian Constitution: Key Features
By the beginning of the twentieth century, the Indian
national movement had been active in the struggle for
independence from British rule for several decades. During
the freedom struggle the nationalists had devoted a great
deal of time to imagining and planning what a free India
would be like. Under the British, they had been forced to
obey rules that they had had very little role in making.
The long experience of authoritarian rule under the colonial
state convinced Indians that free India should be a
democracy in which everyone should be treated equally
and be allowed to participate in government. What
remained to be done then was to work out the ways in
which a democratic government would be set up in India
and the rules that would determine its functioning. This
was done not by one person but by a group of around 300
people who became members of the Constituent Assembly
in 1946 and who met periodically for the next three years
to write India’s Constitution.
There was an extraordinary sense of unity
amongst the members of the Constituent
Assembly. Each of the provisions of the future
constitution was discussed in great detail and
there was a sincere effort to compromise and
reach an agreement through consensus. The
above photo shows Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, a
prominent member of the Constituent Assembly.
Let us recap the reasons why the Constitution plays an important role in democratic societies by
recalling the constitutive rules that you have read about through these examples:
Example
Constitutive Rules
The people of Nepal adopted a new
It lays down ideals that define the kind of
Constitution after the success of the
country that we want to live in.
people’s movement for democracy.
Suresh, the class monitor wrongly picks on
Anil, his classmate.
The girls do not get to play basketball
because the boys are a majority in class.
Shabnam decides to revise her chapters
instead of watching TV.
Q
2024-25

11
These members of the Constituent Assembly had a huge
task before them. The country was made up of several
different communities who spoke different languages,
belonged to different religions, and had distinct cultures.
Also, when the Constitution was being written, India was
going through considerable turmoil. The partition of the
country into India and Pakistan was imminent, some of
the Princely States remained undecided about their future,
and the socio-economic condition of the vast mass of people
appeared dismal. All of these issues played on the minds of
the members of the Constituent Assembly as they drafted
the Constitution. They rose to the occasion and gave this
country a visionary document that reflects a respect for
maintaining diversity while preserving national unity. The
final document also reflects their concern for eradicating
poverty through socio-economic reforms as well as
emphasising the crucial role the people can play in choosing
their representatives.
Listed below are the key features of the Indian Constitution.
While reading these, keep in mind the above-mentioned
concerns of diversity, unity, socio-economic reform and
representation that the authors of this document were
grappling with. Try and understand the ways in which they
tried to balance these concerns with their commitment to
transforming independent India into a strong, democratic
society.
1. Federalism: This refers to the existence of more than
one level of government in the country. In India, we have
governments at the state level and at the centre. Panchayati
Raj is the third tier of government and you have read about
this in your Class VI book. We looked at the functioning
of the state government in your Class VII book and this
year we will read more about the central government.
The vast number of communities in India meant that a system
of government needed to be devised that did not involve only
persons sitting in the capital city of New Delhi and making
Baba Saheb Dr Ambedkar is known as the
Father of the Indian Constitution.
Dr Ambedkar believed that his participation
in the Constituent Assembly helped the
Scheduled Castes get some safeguards in
the draft constitution. But he also stated
that although the laws might exist,
Scheduled Castes still had reason to fear
because the administration of these laws
were in the hands of ‘caste Hindu officers’.
He, therefore, urged Scheduled Castes to
join the government as well as the civil
services.
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
2024-25

Social and Political Life
12
decisions for everyone. Instead, it was important to have
another level of government in the states so that decisions
could be made for that particular area. While each state in
India enjoys autonomy in exercising powers on certain issues,
subjects of national concern require that all of these states
follow the laws of the central government. The Constitution
contains lists that detail the issues that each tier  of
government can make laws on. In addition, the Constitution
also specifies where each tier of government can get the
money from for the work that it does. Under federalism,
the states are not merely agents of the federal government
but draw their authority from the Constitution as well. All
persons in India are governed by laws and policies made by
each of these levels of government.
2. Parliamentary Form of Government: The different tiers
of government that you just read about consist of
representatives who are elected by the people. Your Class
VII book began with the story of Kanta who
was standing in line to vote during an election. The
When the Constituent Assembly adopted the
principle of universal adult franchise, Shri A.K.
Ayyar, a member, remarked that this was done,
“with an abundant faith in the common man
and the ultimate success of democratic rule,
and in the full belief that the introduction of
democratic government on the basis of adult
suffrage will bring enlightenment and promote
the well-being, the standard of life, the
comfort, and the decent living of the common
man”.
Austin, G. 1966. The Indian Constitution: Cornerstone of a
Nation. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
The photo below shows people standing in line
to cast their votes.
2024-25

13
The word ‘State’ is often used in this chapter. This does
NOT refer to state governments. Rather when we use
State, we are trying to distinguish it from ‘government’.
‘Government’ is responsible for administering and
enforcing laws. The government can change with
elections. The State on the other hand refers to a
political institution that represents a sovereign people
who occupy a definite territory. We can, thus, speak of
the Indian State, the Nepali State etc. The Indian State
has a democratic form of government. The government (or
the executive) is one part of the State. The State refers to
more than just the government and cannot be used
interchangeably with it.
Constitution of India guarantees universal adult suffrage
for all citizens. When they were making the Constitution,
the members of the Constituent Assembly felt that the
freedom struggle had prepared the masses for universal adult
suffrage and that this would help encourage a democratic
mindset and break the clutches of traditional caste, class
and gender hierarchies. This  means that the people of India
have a direct role in electing their representatives. Also,
every citizen of the country, irrespective of his/her social
background, can also contest in elections. These
representatives are accountable to the people. You will read
more about why representation is crucial to democratic
functioning in Unit 2 of this book.
3. Separation of Powers:  According to the Constitution, there
are three organs of government. These are the legislature, the
executive and the judiciary. The legislature refers to our elected
representatives. The executive is a smaller group of people who
are responsible for implementing laws and running the
government. The judiciary, of which you will read more in Unit
3 of this book, refers to the system of courts in this country. In
order to prevent the misuse of power by any one branch of
government, the Constitution says that each of these organs
should exercise different powers. Through this, each organ acts
as a check on the other organs of government and this ensures
the balance of power between all three.
Discuss the difference between
State and Government with
your teacher.
Members of the Constituent Assembly
feared that the executive might become too
strong and ignore its responsibility to the
legislature. The Assembly, therefore,
included a number of provisions in the
Constitution to limit and control the action
taken by the executive branch of
government as a whole.
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
2024-25

Social and Political Life
14
4. Fundamental Rights: The section on Fundamental
Rights has often been referred to as the ‘conscience’ of the
Indian Constitution. Colonial rule had created
a certain suspicion of the State in the minds of
the nationalists and they wanted to ensure that a set
of written rights would guard against the misuse of State
power in independent India. Fundamental Rights,
therefore, protect citizens against the arbitrary
and absolute exercise of power by the State. The
Constitution, thus, guarantees the rights of individuals
against the State as well as against other individuals.
Moreover, the various minority communities also expressed
the need for the Constitution to include rights that would
protect their groups. The Constitution, therefore, also
guarantees the rights of minorities against the majority. As
Dr Ambedkar has said about these Fundamental Rights, their
object is two-fold. The first objective is that every citizen must
be in a position to claim those rights. And secondly, these rights
must be binding upon every authority that has got the power
to make laws.
In addition to Fundamental Rights, the Constitution also has a
section called Directive Principles of State Policy. This section
was designed by the members of the Constituent Assembly to
ensure greater social and economic reforms, and to serve as a
guide to the independent Indian State to institute laws and
policies that help reduce the poverty of the masses.
Which Fundamental Rights will the following situations
violate:
- If a 13-year old child is working in a factory manufacturing
carpets.
- If a politician in one state decides to not allow labourers
from other states to work in his state.
- If a group of people are not given permission to open a
Telugu-medium school in Kerala.
- If the government decides not to promote an officer of the
armed forces for being a woman.
The Fundamental Rights in
the Indian Constitution
include:
1. Right to Equality: All persons are
equal before the law. This means
that all persons shall be equally
protected by the laws of the country.
It also states that no citizen can be
discriminated against on the basis of
their religion, caste or sex. Every
person has access to all public places
including playgrounds, hotels, shops
etc. The State cannot discriminate
against anyone in matters of
employment. But there are
exceptions to this that you will read
about later in this book. The practice
of untouchability has also been
abolished.
2. Right to Freedom: This includes
the right to freedom of speech and
expression, the right to form
associations, the right to move freely
and reside in any part of the country,
and the right to practise any
profession, occupation or business.
3. Right against Exploitation: The
Constitution prohibits human
trafficking, forced labour, and
employment of children under 14
years of age.
4. Right to Freedom of Religion:
Religious freedom is provided to all
citizens. Every person has the right
to practise, profess and propagate
the religion of their choice.
5. Cultural and Educational Rights:
The Constitution states that all
minorities, religious or linguistic, can
set up their own educational
institutions in order to preserve and
develop their own culture.
6. Right to Constitutional Remedies:
This allows citizens to move the
court if they believe that any of their
Fundamental Rights have been
violated by the State.
2024-25

15
The above photos show various members of the
Constituent Assembly signing a copy of the
Constitution at its final session on 24 January
1950. The first photo (from top) shows Prime
Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru signing. The
second photo is of Dr Rajendra Prasad,
President of the Constituent Assembly. The last
photo shows the following persons (from right
to left): Shri Jairamdas Daulatram, Minister for
Food and Agriculture; Rajkumari Amrit Kaur,
Health Minister; Dr John Mathai, Finance
Minister; Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, Deputy
Prime Minister and behind him Shri Jagjivan
Ram, Labour Minister.
5.  Secularism: A secular state is one in which the state does
not officially promote any one religion as the state religion.
We will read more about this in the following chapter.
You now understand the ways in which a country’s history
often determines the kind of Constitution that a country
adopts for itself.  The Constitution plays a crucial role in laying
out the ideals that we would like all citizens of the country to
adhere to, including the representatives that we elect to rule
us. Just like in the game of football, a change of constitutive
rules will affect the game. Indian Constitution has been
amended over the years to reflect new concerns of the polity.
Often a major change in the Constitution means a change in
the fundamental nature of the country. We saw this in the case
of Nepal and how it needed to adopt a new
Constitution after it became a democracy.
The different features of the Indian Constitution
outlined above, involve complicated ideas that are
often not easy to grasp. Don’t worry too much
about this for the moment. In the rest of the book
as well as in your higher classes,  you will read
more about these different features of the Indian
Constitution and understand more substantively
what they mean.
The Constitution also mentions Fundamental Duties. Find out
with the help of your teacher what these include and why it is
important for citizens in a democracy to observe these.
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
Illustrate each of the 11 Fundamental Duties with drawings,
pictures, poems or songs and discuss them in the classroom.
2024-25

Social and Political Life
16
1. Why does a democratic country need a Constitution?
2. Look at the wordings of the two documents given below. The first column is from the 1990 Nepal
Constitution. The second column is from the more recent Constitution of Nepal.
What is the difference in who exercises ‘Executive Power’ in the above two Constitutions of Nepal?
3. What would happen if there were no restrictions on the power of elected representatives?
4. In each of the following situations, identify the minority. Write one reason why you think it is
important to respect the views of the minority in each of these situations.
(a) In a school with 30 teachers, 20 of them are male.
(b) In a city, 5 per cent of the population are Buddhists.
(c) In a factory mess for all employees, 80 per cent are vegetarians.
(d) In a class of 50 students, 40 belong to more well-off families.
5. The column on the left lists some of the key features of the Indian Constitution. In the
other column write two sentences, in your own words, on why you think this feature
is important:
Key Feature
Significance
Federalism
Separation of Powers
Fundamental Rights
Parliamentary Form of Government
Exercises
1990 Constitution of Nepal
2015 Constitution of Nepal
Part 7: Executive
Part 7: Federal Executive
Article 35: Executive Power: The executive
Article 75: Executive Power: The executive power
power of the Kingdom of Nepal shall be
of Nepal shall, pursuant to this Constitution and law,
vested in His Majesty and the Council of
be vested in the Council of Ministers.
Ministers.
2024-25

17
Arbitrary: When nothing is fixed and is instead left to one’s judgment or choice. This
can be used to refer to rules that are not fixed, or decisions that have no basis etc.
Ideal: A goal or a principle in its most excellent or perfect form.
Indian national movement: The Indian national movement emerged in nineteenth-
century India and saw thousands of men and women coming together to fight British
rule. This culminated in India’s independence in 1947. You will learn about this in
greater detail in your history textbook this year.
Polity: A society that has an organised political structure. India is a democratic polity.
Sovereign: In the context of this chapter it refers to an independent people.
Human Trafficking: The practice of the illegal buying and selling of different
commodities across national borders. In the context of Fundamental Rights discussed
in this chapter, it refers to illegal trade in human beings, particularly women and
children.
Tyranny: The cruel and unjust use of power or authority.
GLOSSARY
6. Write down the names of the Indian States,
which share borders with the following
neighbouring nations:
(a) Bangladesh
(b) Bhutan
(c) Nepal
Chapter 1: The Indian Constitution
2024-25
