Have you ever thought of how children lived about two 
hundred years ago? Nowadays most girls from middle-
class families go to school, and often study with boys. On 
growing up, many of them go to colleges and universities, 
and take up jobs after that. They have to be adults before 
they are legally married, and according to law, they can 
marry anyone they like, from any caste and community, 
and widows can remarry too. All women, like all men, 
can vote and stand for 
elections. Of course, these 
rights are not actually 
enjoyed by all. Poor people 
have little or no access to 
education, and in many 
families, women cannot 
choose their husbands. 
Two hundred years ago 
things were very different. 
Most children were married 
off at an early age. Both 
Hindu and Muslim men 
could marry more than 
one wife. In some parts of 
the country, widows were 
praised if they chose death 
by burning themselves on 
the funeral pyre of their husbands. Women who died in this 
manner, whether willingly or otherwise, were called “sati”, 
meaning virtuous women. Women’s rights to property were 
also restricted. Besides, most women had virtually no access 
to education. In many parts of the country people believed 
that if a woman was educated, she would become a widow.  
Women, Caste and 
Reform
7
Fig. 1 – Sati, painted by 
Balthazar Solvyn, 1813
This was one of the many 
pictures of sati painted by the 
European artists who came 
to India. The practice of sati 
was seen as evidence of the 
barbarism of the East.
Reprint 2024-25

WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM         79
Differences between men and women were not the 
only ones in society. In most regions, people were divided 
along lines of caste. Brahmans and Kshatriyas considered 
themselves as “upper castes”. Others, such as traders 
and moneylenders (often referred to as Vaishyas) were 
placed after them. Then came peasants, and artisans 
such as weavers and potters (referred to as Shudras). 
At the lowest rung were those who laboured to keep 
cities and villages clean or worked at jobs that upper 
castes considered “polluting”, that is, it could lead to 
the loss of caste status. The upper castes also treated 
many of these groups at the bottom as “untouchable”. 
They were not allowed to enter temples, draw water 
from the wells used by the upper castes, or bathe in 
ponds where upper castes bathed. They were seen as 
inferior human beings.
Over the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, many of 
these norms and perceptions slowly changed. Let us see 
how this happened. 
Working Towards Change
From the early nineteenth century, we find debates and 
discussions about social customs and practices taking on 
a new character. One important reason for this was the 
development of new forms of communication. For the 
first time, books, newspapers, magazines, leaflets and 
pamphlets were printed. These were far cheaper and far 
more accessible than the manuscripts that you have read 
about in Class VII. Therefore ordinary people could read 
these, and many of them could also write and express their 
ideas in their own languages. All kinds of issues – social, 
political, economic and religious – could now be debated 
and discussed by men (and sometimes by women as well) 
in the new cities. The discussions could reach out to a 
wider public, and could become linked to movements for 
social change. 
These debates were often initiated by Indian reformers 
and reform groups. One such reformer was Raja 
Rammohun Roy (1772–1833). He founded a reform 
association known as the Brahmo Sabha (later known 
as the Brahmo Samaj) in Calcutta. People such as 
Rammohun Roy are described as reformers because 
they felt that changes were necessary in society, and 
unjust practices needed to be done away with. They 
thought that the best way to ensure such changes was 
by persuading people to give up old practices and adopt 
a new way of life.
Activity
Can you think of the 
ways in which social 
customs and practices 
were discussed in the 
pre-printing age when 
books, newspapers and 
pamphlets were not 
readily available?
Reprint 2024-25

80 
OUR PASTS – III
Rammohun Roy was keen to spread the knowledge of 
Western education in the country and bring about greater 
freedom and equality for women. He wrote about the way 
women were forced to bear the burden of domestic work, 
confined to the home and the kitchen, and not allowed to 
move out and become educated.
Changing the lives of widows 
Rammohun Roy was particularly moved by the problems 
widows faced in their lives. He began a campaign against 
the practice of sati.
Rammohun Roy was well versed in Sanskrit, Persian 
and several other Indian and Europeon languages. He tried 
to show through his writings that the practice of widow 
burning had no sanction in ancient texts. By the early 
nineteenth century, as you have read in Chapter 6, many 
British officials had also begun to criticise Indian traditions 
and customs. They were therefore, more than willing to 
listen to Rammohun who was reputed to be a learned man. 
In 1829, sati was banned. 
The strategy adopted by Rammohun was used by 
later reformers as well. Whenever they wished to 
challenge a practice that seemed harmful, they tried 
to find a verse or sentence in the ancient sacred texts 
that supported their point of view. They then suggested 
that the practice as it existed at present was against 
early tradition.
Fig. 2 – Raja Rammohun Roy, 
painted by Rembrandt Peale, 1833
Fig. 3 – Hook swinging 
festival
In this popular festival, 
devotees underwent a 
peculiar form of suffering 
as part of ritual worship. 
With hooks pierced 
through their skin they 
swung themselves on 
a wheel. In the early 
nineteenth century, when 
European officials began 
criticising Indian customs 
and rituals as barbaric, 
this was one of the rituals 
that came under attack. 
Reprint 2024-25

WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM         81
 “We first tie them down to the pile” 
Rammohun Roy published many pamphlets to spread his 
ideas. Some of these were written as a dialogue between the 
advocate and critic of a traditional practice. Here is one such 
dialogue on sati: 
ADVOCATE OF SATI:
Women are by nature of inferior understanding, 
without resolution, unworthy of trust … Many of them, 
on the death of their husbands, become desirous of 
accompanying them; but to remove every chance of 
their trying to escape from the blazing fire, in burning 
them we first tie them down to the pile. 
OPPONENT OF SATI: 
When did you ever afford them a fair opportunity 
of exhibiting their natural capacity? How then can 
you accuse them of want of understanding? If, after 
instruction in knowledge and wisdom, a person cannot 
comprehend or retain what has been taught him, we 
may consider him as deficient; but if you do not educate 
women how can you see them as inferior.  
Fig. 4 – Swami Dayanand 
Saraswati
Dayanand founded the Arya Samaj 
in 1875, an organisation that 
attempted to reform Hinduism. 
For instance, one of the most famous reformers, 
Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar, used the ancient texts to 
suggest that widows could remarry. His suggestion was 
adopted by British officials, and a law was passed in 1856 
permitting widow remarriage. Those who were against 
the remarriage of widows opposed Vidyasagar, and even 
boycotted him. 
By the second half of the nineteenth century, the 
movement in favour of widow remarriage spread to other 
parts of the country. In the Telugu-speaking areas of 
the Madras Presidency, Veerasalingam Pantulu formed 
an association for widow remarriage. Around the same 
time, young intellectuals and reformers in Bombay 
pledged themselves to working for the same cause. In 
the north, Swami Dayanand Saraswati, who founded the 
reform association called Arya Samaj, also supported 
widow remarriage. 
Yet, the number of widows who actually remarried 
remained low. Those who married were not easily accepted 
in society and conservative groups continued to oppose 
the new law.  
Source 1
Activity
This argument was 
taking place more 
than 175 years ago. 
Write down the 
different arguments 
you may have heard 
around you on the 
worth of women. In 
what ways have  the 
views changed?
Reprint 2024-25

82	
OUR PASTS – III
Girls begin going to school
Many of the reformers felt that education for girls was 
necessary in order to improve the condition of women. 
Vidyasagar in Calcutta and many other reformers in 
Bombay set up schools for girls. When the first schools 
were opened in the mid-nineteenth century, many 
people were afraid of them. They feared that schools 
would take girls away from home, prevent them from 
doing their domestic duties. Moreover, girls had to travel 
through public places in order to reach school. Many 
people felt that this would have a corrupting influence 
on them. They felt that girls should stay away from 
public spaces. Therefore, throughout the nineteenth 
century, most educated women were taught at home by 
liberal fathers or husbands. Sometimes women taught 
themselves. Do you remember what you read about 
Rashsundari Debi in your book Social and Political Life 
last year? She was one of those who secretly learned 
to read and write in the flickering light of candles 
at night.
In the latter part of the century, schools for girls were 
established by the Arya Samaj in Punjab, and  Jyotirao 
Phule in Maharashtra.
In aristocratic Muslim households in North India, 
women learnt to read the Koran in Arabic. They were taught 
by women who came home to teach. Some reformers such 
as Mumtaz Ali reinterpreted verses from the Koran to argue 
for women’s education. The first Urdu novels began to be 
written from the late nineteenth century. Amongst other 
things, these were meant to encourage women to read 
about religion and domestic management in a language 
they could understand. 
Women write about 
women
From the early twentieth 
century, Muslim women 
like the Begums of Bhopal 
played a notable role in 
promoting education among 
women. They founded a 
primary school for girls at 
Aligarh. Another remarkable 
woman, Begum Rokeya 
Sakhawat Hossain started 
schools for Muslim girls in 
Patna and Calcutta. She 
Fig. 5
Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar
Fig. 6 – Students of Hindu Mahila 
Vidyalaya, 1875
When girls’ schools were first set 
up in the nineteenth century, it 
was generally believed that the 
curriculum for girls ought to be 
less taxing than that for boys. 
The Hindu Mahila Vidyalaya 
was  one of the first institutions 
to provide girls with the kind of 
learning that was usual for boys 
at the time.
Reprint 2024-25

women, caste and reform         83
was a fearless critic of conservative ideas, arguing that 
religious leaders of every faith accorded an inferior 
place to women. 
By the 1880s, Indian women began to enter universities. 
Some of them trained to be doctors, some became 
teachers. Many women began to write and publish their 
critical views on the place of women in society. Tarabai 
Shinde, a woman educated at home at Poona, published 
a book, Stripurushtulna, (A Comparison between Women 
and Men), criticising the social differences between men 
and women (Men Dominant Society).
Pandita Ramabai, a great 
scholar of Sanskrit, felt that 
Hinduism was oppressive towards 
women, and wrote a book about 
the miserable lives of upper-caste 
Hindu women. She founded a 
widows’ home at Poona to provide 
shelter to widows who had been 
treated badly by their husbands’ 
relatives. Here women were 
trained so that they could support 
themselves economically. 
Needless to say, all this more than 
alarmed the orthodox. For instance, 
many Hindu nationalists felt that 
Hindu women were adopting Western ways and that this 
would corrupt Hindu culture and erode family values. 
Orthodox Muslims were also worried about the impact of 
these changes. 
As you can see, by the end of the nineteenth century, 
women themselves were actively working for reform. 
They wrote books, edited magazines, founded schools 
and training centres, and set up women’s associations. 
From the early twentieth century, they formed political 
pressure groups to push through laws for female 
suffrage (the right to vote) and better health care and 
education for women. Some of them joined various 
kinds of nationalist and socialist movements from 
the 1920s.
In the twentieth century, leaders such as Jawaharlal 
Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose lent their support to 
demands for greater equality and freedom for women. 
Nationalist leaders promised that there would be full 
suffrage for all men and women after Independence. 
However, till then they asked women to concentrate on 
the anti-British struggles. 
Once a woman’s 
husband has died... 
Fig. 7
Pandita Ramabai
Source 2
In her book, 
Stripurushtulna, 
Tarabai Shinde wrote: 
Isn’t a woman’s life as 
dear to her as yours is 
to you? It’s as if women 
are meant to be made 
of something different 
from men altogether, 
made from dust  from 
earth or rock or rusted 
iron whereas you and 
your lives are made 
from the purest gold. 
… You’re asking 
me what I mean. I 
mean once a woman’s 
husband has died, … 
what’s in store for her? 
The barber comes to 
shave all the curls and 
hair off her head, just 
to cool your eyes. … 
She is shut out from 
going to weddings, 
receptions and other 
auspicious occasions 
that married women 
go to. And why all these 
restrictions? Because 
her husband has died. 
She is unlucky: ill 
fate is written on her 
forehead. Her face is 
not to be seen, it’s a 
bad omen.
Tarabai Shinde, Stripurushtulna
Reprint 2024-25

84	
OUR PASTS – III
Law against child marriage  
With the growth of women’s organisations 
and writings on these issues, the 
momentum for reform gained strength. 
People challenged another established 
custom –  that of child marriage. There 
were a number of Indian legislators in the 
Central Legislative Assembly who fought 
to make a law preventing child marriage. 
In 1929, the Child Marriage Restraint Act 
was passed without the kind of bitter 
debates and struggles that earlier laws 
had seen. According to the Act, no man 
below the age of 18 and woman below 
the age of 16 could marry. Subsequently 
these limits were raised to 21 for men and 
18 for women.
Caste and Social Reform
Some of the social reformers we have been discussing 
also criticised caste inequalities. Rammohun Roy 
translated an old Buddhist text that was critical of 
caste. The Prarthana Samaj adhered to the tradition of 
Bhakti that believed in spiritual equality of all castes. 
In Bombay, the Paramhans Mandali was founded in 
1840 to work for the abolition of caste. Many of these 
reformers and members of reform associations were 
people of upper castes. Often, in secret meetings, these 
reformers would violate caste taboos on food and touch, 
in an effort to get rid of the hold of caste prejudice in 
their lives. 
There were also others who questioned the injustices 
of the caste social order. During the course of the 
nineteenth century, Christian missionaries began 
setting up schools for tribal groups and “lower”-caste 
children. These children were thus equipped with some 
resources to make their way into a changing world.
At the same time, the poor began leaving their villages 
to look for jobs that were opening up in the cities. There 
was work in the factories that were coming up, and jobs 
in municipalities. Think of the new demands of labour 
Fig. 8 – Bride at the age of eight
This is a picture of a child bride at the beginning of the 
twentieth century. Did you know that even today over 
20 per cent of girls in India are married below
the age of 18?
Reprint 2024-25

WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM         85
this created. Drains had to 
be dug, roads laid, buildings 
constructed, and cities 
cleaned. This required coolies, 
diggers, carriers, bricklayers, 
sewage cleaners, sweepers, 
palanquin bearers, rickshaw 
pullers. Where did this labour 
come from? The poor from 
the villages and small towns, 
many of them from low 
castes, began moving to the 
cities where there was a new 
demand for labour. Some also 
went to work in plantations 
in Assam, Mauritius, Trinidad and Indonesia. Work in 
the new locations was often very hard. But the poor, 
the people from low castes, saw this as an opportunity 
to get away from the oppressive hold that upper-caste 
landowners exercised over their lives and the daily 
humiliation they suffered. 
Who could produce shoes?
Leatherworkers have been traditionally held in 
contempt since they work with dead animals 
which are seen as dirty and polluting. During 
the First World War, however, there was a 
huge demand for shoes for the armies. Caste 
prejudice against leather work meant that only 
the traditional leather workers and shoemakers 
were ready to supply army shoes. So they could 
ask for high prices and gain impressive profits. 
There were other jobs too. The army, for instance, 
offered opportunities. A number of Mahar people, who 
were regarded as untouchable, found jobs in the Mahar 
Regiment. The father of B.R. Ambedkar, the leader of the 
Dalit movement, taught at an army school.
Fig. 9 – A coolie ship, nineteenth 
century
This coolie ship – named John 
Allen – carried many Indian 
labourers to Mauritius where 
they did a variety of forms of hard 
labour. Most of these labourers 
were from low castes.
Fig. 10 – Madigas making shoes, nineteenth-century 
Andhra Pradesh
Madigas were an important untouchable caste of 
present-day Andhra Pradesh. They were experts at 
cleaning hides, tanning them for use, and sewing 
sandals.
Reprint 2024-25

86 
OUR PASTS – III
Demands for equality and justice
Gradually, by the second half of the nineteenth century, 
people from within the Non-Brahman castes began 
organising movements against caste discrimination, and 
demanded social equality and justice.
The Satnami movement in Central India was founded 
by Ghasidas who worked among the leatherworkers and 
organised a movement to improve their social status. In 
eastern Bengal, Haridas Thakur’s Matua sect worked 
among Chandala cultivators. Haridas questioned 
Brahmanical texts that supported the caste system. 
In what is present-day Kerala, a guru from Ezhava 
caste, Shri Narayana Guru, proclaimed the ideals of 
unity for his people. He argued against treating people 
unequally on the basis of caste differences. According 
to him, all humankind belonged to the same caste. One 
of his famous statements was: 
“oru jati, oru matam, oru daivam 
manushyanu” (one caste, one 
religion, one god for humankind).
All these sects were founded 
by leaders who came from Non-
Brahman castes and worked 
amongst them. They tried to change 
those habits and practices which 
provoked the contempt of dominant 
castes. They tried to create a 
sense of self-esteem among the 
subordinate castes.
Fig. 12 – Shri Narayana Guru
Activity
1.	Imagine that you are 	
	
one of the students 	
	
sitting in the school 	
	
veranda and listening 	
	
to the lessons. What 	
	
kind of questions 	
	
would be rising in 	
	
your mind?
2. Some people thought 	
	
this situation was 	
	
better than the total 	
	
lack of education for 	
	
untouchable people. 	
	
Would you agree with 	
	
this view?

No place inside  
the classroom             
I n t h e B o m b a y 
Presidency, as late as 
1829, untouchables 
were not allowed into 
even government schools. 
When some of them 
pressed hard for that 
right, they were allowed 
to sit on the veranda 
outside the classroom 
and listen to the lessons, 
without “polluting” the 
room where upper-caste 
boys were taught. 
Fig. 11 – Dublas of Gujarat carrying mangoes to the market.
Dublas laboured for upper-caste landowners, cultivating their fields, 
and working at a variety of odd jobs at the landlord’s house.
Reprint 2024-25

WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM         87
Gulamgiri 
One of the most vocal amongst the “low-caste” leaders was 
Jyotirao Phule. Born in 1827, he studied in schools set up 
by Christian missionaries. On growing up, he developed 
his own ideas about the injustices of caste society. He 
set out to attack the Brahmans’ claim that they were 
superior to others, since they were Aryans. Phule argued 
that the Aryans were foreigners, who came from outside 
the subcontinent, and defeated and subjugated the true 
children of the country – those who had lived here from 
before the coming of the Aryans.  As the Aryans established 
their dominance, they began looking at the defeated 
population as inferior, as low-caste people. According to 
Phule, the “upper” castes had no right to their land and 
power: in reality, the land belonged to indigenous people, 
the so-called low castes. 
Phule claimed that before Aryan rule, there existed 
a golden age when warrior-peasants tilled the land and 
ruled the Maratha countryside in just and fair ways. 
He proposed that Shudras (labouring castes) and Ati 
Shudras (untouchables) should unite to challenge caste 
discrimination. The Satyashodhak Samaj, an association 
Phule founded, propagated caste equality.
Fig. 13 –  Jyotirao Phule
In 1873, Phule wrote a book named Gulamgiri, 
meaning slavery. Some ten years before this, the 
American Civil War had been fought, leading to the end 
of slavery in America. Phule dedicated his book to all 
 “Me here and you over there” 
Phule was also critical of the anti-colonial nationalism that was 
preached by upper-caste leaders. He wrote:
The Brahmans have hidden away the sword of their religion 
which has cut the throat of the peoples’ prosperity and now 
go about posing as great patriots of their country. They … 
give this advice to ... our Shudra, Muslim and Parsi youth 
that unless we put away all quarrelling amongst ourselves 
about the divisions between high and low in our country 
and come together, our ... country will never make any 
progress ... It will be unity to serve their purposes, and then 
it will be me here and you over there again.
Jyotiba Phule,  The Cultivator’s Whipcord
Source 3
Activity
Carefully read 
Source 3. What do 
you think Jyotirao 
Phule meant by “me 
here and you over 
there again”? 

Reprint 2024-25

88	
OUR PASTS – III
“We are also         
human beings”
In 1927, Ambedkar said:
We now want to go to 
the Tank only to prove 
that like others, we are 
also human beings … 
Hindu society should 
be reorganised on 
two main principles – 
equality and absence 
of casteism. 
Source 4
Fig. 14 – The gateway to the 
Madurai temple, drawn by 
Thomas Daniell, 1792
“Untouchables” were not 
allowed anywhere near such 
gateways until the temple 
entry movement began.
those Americans who had fought to free slaves, 
thus establishing a link between the conditions 
of the “lower” castes in India and the black slaves 
in America.
As this example shows, Phule extended his criticism 
of the caste system to argue against all forms of 
inequality. He was concerned about the plight of 
“upper”-caste women, the miseries of the labourer, and 
the humiliation of the “low” castes. This movement for 
caste reform was continued in the twentieth century 
by other great dalit leaders like Dr B.R. Ambedkar 
in western India and E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker in 
the south. 
Who could enter temples? 
Ambedkar was born into a Mahar family. As a child 
he experienced what caste prejudice meant in 
everyday life. In school he was forced to sit 
outside the classroom on the ground, and 
was not allowed to drink water from taps that 
upper-caste children used. After finishing 
school, he got a fellowship to go to the US for 
higher studies. On his return to India in 1919, he 
wrote extensively about “upper”-caste  power 
in contemporary society. 
In 1927, Ambedkar started a temple entry 
movement, in which his Mahar caste followers 
participated. Brahman priests were outraged 
when the Dalits used water from the 
temple tank. 
Ambedkar led three such movements 
for temple entry between 1927 and 
1935. His aim was to make everyone 
see the power of caste prejudices 
within society. 
Reprint 2024-25

WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM         89
The Non-Brahman movement
In the early twentieth century, the non-Brahman 
movement started. The initiative came from those 
non-Brahman castes that had acquired access to 
education, wealth and influence. They argued that 
Brahmans were heirs of Aryan invaders from the north 
who had conquered southern lands from the original 
inhabitants of the region – the indigenous Dravidian 
races. They also challenged Brahmanical claims 
to power. 
E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker, or Periyar, as he 
was called, came from a middle-class family. 
Interestingly, he had been an ascetic in his early 
life and had studied Sanskrit scriptures carefully. 
Later, he became a member of the Congress, only 
to leave it in disgust when he found that at a feast 
organised by nationalists, seating arrangements 
followed caste distinctions – that is, the lower castes 
were made to sit at a distance from the upper castes. 
Convinced that untouchables had to fight for their 
dignity, Periyar founded the Self Respect Movement. 
He argued that untouchables were the true upholders 
of an original Tamil and Dravidian culture which 
had been subjugated by Brahmans. He felt that 
all religious authorities saw social divisions and 
inequality as God-given. Untouchables had to free 
themselves, therefore, from all religions in order to 
achieve social equality. 
Periyar was an outspoken critic of Hindu scriptures, 
especially the Codes of Manu, the ancient lawgiver, and 
the Bhagavad Gita and the Ramayana. He said that 
these texts had been used to establish the authority 
of Brahmans over lower castes and the domination of 
men over women.
These assertions did not go unchallenged. The 
forceful speeches, writings and movements of lower-
caste leaders did lead to rethinking and some self- 
criticism among upper-caste nationalist leaders. 
But orthodox Hindu society also reacted by founding 
Sanatan Dharma Sabhas and the Bharat Dharma 
Mahamandal in the north, and associations like 
the Brahman Sabha in Bengal. The object of these 
associations was to uphold caste distinctions as a 
cornerstone of Hinduism, and show how this was 
sanctified by scriptures. Debates and struggles over 
caste continued beyond the colonial period and are 
still going on in our own times.
Periyar on women
Periyar wrote:
Only with the arrival 
of words such as 
Thara Mukurtham our 
women had become 
puppets in the hands 
of their husbands … 
we ended up with such 
fathers who advise 
their daughters ... that 
they had been gifted 
away  to their husbands 
and they belong to 
their husband’s place. 
This is the … result of 
our association with 
Sanskrit.
  Periyar, cited in Periyar 
Chintahnaikal
Source 5
Fig. 15 –  E.V. Ramaswamy 
Naicker (Periyar)
Activity
Why does caste remain 
such a controversial issue 
today? What do you think 
was the most important 
movement against caste in 
colonial times?  

Reprint 2024-25

90	
OUR PASTS – III
Fig. 17                   
Henry Derozio
The Brahmo Samaj
The Brahmo Samaj, formed in 1830, prohibited all forms of idolatry  and 
sacrifice, believed in the Upanishads, and forbade its members from 
criticising other religious practices. It critically drew upon the ideals of 
religions – especially of Hinduism and Christianity – looking at their negative 
and positive dimensions.
Derozio and Young Bengal 
Henry Louis Vivian Derozio, a teacher at Hindu College, Calcutta, in the 
1820s, promoted radical ideas and encouraged his pupils to question all 
authority. Referred to as the Young Bengal Movement, his students attacked 
tradition  and custom, demanded education for women and campaigned 
for the freedom of thought and expression.
The Ramakrishna Mission and Swami Vivekananda
Named after Ramakrishna Paramhansa, Swami Vivekananda’s guru, the 
Ramakrishna Mission stressed the ideal of salvation through social service 
and selfless action.
Swami Vivekananda (1863-1902), whose original name was Narendra 
Nath Dutta, combined the simple teachings of Sri Ramakrishna with his 
well founded modern outlook and spread them all over the world.  After 
hearing him in the World Parliament of Religions at Chicago in 1893, the 
New York Herald reported, “We feel how foolish it is to send missionaries 
to this learned nation”. Indeed, Swami Vivekananda was the first Indian 
in modern times, who re-established the spiritual pre-eminence of the 
Vedanta philosophy on a global scale.  But his mission was not simply to 
talk of religion.  He was extremely pained at the poverty and the misery 
of his country men.  He firmly believed that any reform could become 
successful only by uplifting the condition of the masses. Therefore, his clarion call to the people 
of India was to rise above the narrow confines of their ‘religion of the kitchen’ and come together 
in the service of the nation. By sending out this call, he made a signal contribution to the nascent 
nationalism of India. His sense of nationalism was, however, not narrow in its conception.  He 
was convinced that many of the problems facing the mankind could only be overcome if the 
nations of the world come together on an equal footing. Therefore, his exhortation to the youth 
was to unite on the basis of a common spiritual heritage. In this exhortation, he became truly 
‘the symbol of a new spirit and a source of strength for the future’.
The Prarthana Samaj
Established in 1867 at Bombay, the Prarthana Samaj sought to remove caste restrictions, 
abolish child marriage, encourage the education of women, and end the ban on widow 
remarriage. Its religious meetings drew upon Hindu, Buddhist and Christian texts.
The Veda Samaj
Established in Madras (Chennai) in 1864, the Veda Samaj  was inspired by the Brahmo Samaj. 
It worked to abolish caste distinctions and promote widow remarriage and women’s education. 
Its members believed in one God. They condemned  the superstitions and rituals of orthodox 
Hinduism.
Fig. 16 – Keshub 
Chunder Sen – one 
of the main leaders 
of the Brahmo 
Samaj
Organising for reform 
Fig. 18  Swami 
Vivekananda
Reprint 2024-25

WOMEN, CASTE AND REFORM         91
The Aligarh Movement
The Mohammedan Anglo‐Oriental College, founded by Sayyid Ahmed 
Khan in 1875 at Aligarh, later became the Aligarh Muslim University. 
The institution offered modern education, including Western science, to 
Muslims. The Aligarh Movement, as it was known, had an enormous impact 
in the area of educational reform.
Fig. 19 
Sayyid Ahmed Khan 
Fig. 20 – Khalsa College, Amritsar, established in 1892 by the 
leaders of the Singh Sabha movement
The Singh Sabha Movement
Reform organisations of the Sikhs, 
the first Singh Sabhas were formed 
at Amritsar in 1873 and at Lahore 
in 1879. The Sabhas sought to 
rid Sikhism of superstitions, caste 
distinctions and practices seen by 
them as non‐Sikh. They promoted 
education among the Sikhs, often 
combining modern instruction with 
Sikh teachings.
Let’s imagine 
Imagine you are a 
teacher in the school 
set up by Rokeya 
Hossain. There are 20 
girls in your charge. 
Write an account of 
the discussions that 
might have taken place 
on any one day in the 
school. 
Let’s recall
1. What social ideas did the following people support.
Rammohun Roy
Dayanand Saraswati
Veerasalingam Pantulu
Jyotirao Phule
Pandita Ramabai
Periyar
Mumtaz Ali
Ishwarchandra Vidyasagar
2.	State whether true or false: 
(a)	 When the British captured Bengal, they framed 
many new laws to regulate the rules regarding 
marriage, adoption, inheritance of property, etc.
(b)	 Social reformers had to discard the ancient texts 
in order to argue for reform in social practices.
(c)	 Reformers got full support from all sections of 
the people of the country.
(d)	 The Child Marriage Restraint Act was passed 
in 1829.
Reprint 2024-25

92 
OUR PASTS – III
Let’s discuss
	3.	 How did the knowledge of ancient texts help the 
reformers promote new laws?
  4.	 What were the different reasons people had for not 
sending girls to school?
  5.	 Why were Christian missionaries attacked by many 
people in the country? Would some people have 
supported them too? If so, for what reasons?
  6. In the British period, what new opportunities 
opened up for people who came from castes that 
were regarded as “low”?
  7.  How did Jyotirao, and other reformer justify their 
criticism of caste inequality in society? 
  8.	 Why did Phule dedicate his book Gulamgiri to the 
American movement to free slaves?
  9.	 What did Ambedkar want to achieve through the 
temple entry movement?
10.	 Why were Jyotirao Phule and Ramaswamy Naicker 
critical of the national movement? Did their 
criticism help the national struggle in any way?
Reprint 2024-25
