Social and Political Life
28
Unit Two
2024-25

29
Teacher’s Note
This is a continuation of the theme of government that has already been dealt with in the Class
VI and VII textbooks. Hence, a recap of ideas is important especially those related to elections,
representation and participation. These ideas can be made more clear to students through bringing
in actual examples into the classroom. Newspaper and TV reports could be used to facilitate this.
Chapter 3 discusses some of the functions of Parliament. The ways in which these connect to the
idea of parliamentary democracy need to be emphasised. Hence it is important to explain the
critical role played by citizens and allow students to air views regarding this. At times students
might be cynical about the political process and your role as a teacher is not to dismiss or agree
with this cynicism but rather redirect it towards what the Constitution intends.
Chapter 3 is also on understanding laws. Children have little exposure to laws. Therefore, they
would require more examples from a familiar context. It is through this they can figure out
that laws are meant to apply in an equitable manner.
The storyboard contained in Chapter 3 portrays how a new law comes into being. The focus of
this storyboard is not on the processes within Parliament. In contrast, the storyboard highlights
the important role that people play in transforming an urgent social issue into law. In addition
to the law already highlighted, it would be good to discuss another example of a new/contemplated
law so that students can relate to the role of people in bringing this about.
The chapter ends with a section on unpopular laws. These refer to laws that often restrict the
Fundamental Rights of certain populations. History provides us with examples of several groups
that protest what they view as unjust laws. Bring in these examples into the classroom to
discuss how a law can be unpopular. Allow students to research more examples in the Indian
context and debate these in the classroom using the Fundamental Rights listed in Chapter 1 as
their yardstick.
Parliament and
the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
30
Chapter 3
We in India pride ourselves on being a democracy.
Here we will try and understand the relation between
the ideas of participation in decision-making and
the need for all democratic governments to have the
consent of their citizens.
It is these elements that together make us a
democracy and this is best expressed in the institution
of the Parliament. In this chapter, we will try to see
how the Parliament enables citizens of India to
participate in decision making and control the
government, thus making it the most important
symbol of Indian democracy and a key feature of
the Constitution.
Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

31
India, as we know, became independent on 15 August 1947.
Preceding this was a long and difficult struggle in which
many sections of society participated. People from various
backgrounds joined the struggle and they were inspired by
the ideas of freedom, equality and participation in decision–
making. Under colonial rule, the people had lived in fear
of the British government and did not agree with many of
the decisions that they took. But they faced grave danger if
they tried to criticise these decisions. The freedom
movement changed this situation. The nationalists began
to openly criticise the British government and make
demands. As far back as 1885, the Indian National Congress
demanded that there be elected members in the legislature
with a right to discuss the budget and ask questions. The
Government of India Act 1909, allowed for some elected
representation. While these early legislatures under the
British government were in response to the growing
demands of the nationalists, they did not allow for all adults
to vote nor could people participate in decision making.
As you read in Chapter 1, the experience of colonial rule as
well as the participation of different people in the struggle
for freedom left little doubt in the minds of the nationalists
that all persons in independent India would be able to
participate in making decisions. With the coming of
independence, we were going to be citizens of a free
country. This did not mean that the government could do
what it felt like, it meant that the government had to be
sensitive to people’s needs and demands. The dreams and
aspirations of the freedom struggle were made concrete in
the Constitution of independent India that laid down the
principle of universal adult franchise, i.e. that all adult
citizens of the country have the right to vote.
Why should People Decide?
Parliament and the
Making of Laws
What do you think the artist
is trying to convey through
the image of Parliament on
the previous page?
The above photo shows a voter reading
instructions on how to use an Electronic Voting
Machine (EVM). EVMs were used throughout
the country for the first time in the 2004
general elections. The use of EVMs in 2004
saved around 1,50,000 trees which would
have been cut to produce about 8,000 tons of
paper for printing the ballot papers.
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
32
People and their Representatives
The take-off point for a democracy is the idea of consent, i.e.
the desire, approval and participation of people. It is the
decision of people that creates a democratic government and
decides about its functioning. The basic idea in this kind of
democracy is that the individual or the citizen is the most
important person and that in principle the government as well
as other public institutions need to have the trust of these
citizens.
How does the individual give approval to the government? One
way of doing so, as you read, is through elections. People would
elect their representatives to the Parliament, then, one group
from among these elected representatives forms the government.
The Parliament, which is made up of all representatives together,
controls and guides the government. In this sense people, through
their chosen representatives, form the government and also
control it.
Give one reason why you think
there should be universal adult
franchise.
Do you think there would be
any difference if the class
monitor was selected by the
teacher or elected by the
students? Discuss.
This photo shows election staff using an
elephant to carry polling material and EVMs to
polling stations located in difficult terrain.
2024-25

33
Q
1. Use the terms ‘constituency’ and ‘represent’ to explain who an MLA is and how the
person gets elected?
2. Discuss with your teacher the difference between a State Legislative Assembly
(Vidhan Sabha) and the Parliament (Lok Sabha).
3. From the list below, identify the work of a State government and that of a Central
government.
(a) The decision of the Indian government to maintain peaceful relations
with China.
(b)The decision of the Madhya Pradesh government to discontinue Board
exams in Class VIII for all schools under this Board.
(c) Introduction of a new train connection between Ajmer and Mysore.
(d)Introduction of a new 1,000 rupee note.
4. Fill in the blanks with the following words.
universal adult franchise;  MLAs;  representatives;  directly
Democratic governments in our times are usually referred to as representative
democracies. In representative democracies, people do not participate ……...............…
but, instead, choose their ….............……..through an election process. These …….......…..
meet and make decisions for the entire population. These days, a government
cannot call itself democratic unless it allows what is known as ............................................
This means that all adult citizens in the country are allowed to vote.
5. You have read that most elected members whether in the Panchayat, or the Vidhan
Sabha or the Parliament are elected for a fixed period of five years. Why do
we have a system where the representatives are elected for a fixed period and not
for life?
6. You have read that people participate in other ways and not just through elections
to express approval or disapproval of the actions of government. Can you describe
three such ways through a small skit?
The above idea of representation has been an important theme
in your Class VI and VII Social and Political Life textbooks. You
are familiar with how representatives are chosen at different
levels of government. Let us recall these ideas by doing the
following exercises.
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
34
The Role of the Parliament
Created after 1947, the Indian Parliament is an expression of
the faith that the people of India have in principles of
democracy. These are participation by people in the decision-
making process and government by consent. The Parliament
in our system has immense powers because it is the
representative of the people. Elections to the Parliament are
held in a similar manner as they are for the state legislature.
The Lok Sabha is usually elected once every five years. The
country is divided into numerous  constituencies as shown
in the map on page 45. Each of these constituencies elects
one person to the Parliament. The candidates who contest
elections usually belong to different political parties.
1. The Parliament of India (Sansad) is the supreme law-making institution. It has two Houses, the Rajya Sabha and the Lok Sabha.
2. Rajya Sabha (Council of States), with a total strength of 250 members, is chaired by the Vice-President of India.
3. Lok Sabha (House of the People), with a total membership of 543, is presided over by the Speaker.
1
2
3
2024-25

35
With the help of the table below, let us understand
this further.
Results of the 17th Lok Sabha Elections, (May 2019)
Use the table alongside to
answer the questions below:
Who will form the
government? Why?
Who will be present for
discussions in the Lok Sabha?
Is this process similar to what
you have read about in
Class VII?
The photograph on page 28
shows results from the 3rd Lok
Sabha elections held in 1962.
Use the photograph to answer
the following questions:
a. Which state has the highest
number of MPs in the Lok
Sabha? Why do you think this
is so?
b. Which state has the least
number of MPs in the Lok
Sabha?
c. Which political party has
won the most seats in all
states?
d. Which party do you think
will form the government? Give
reasons why.
Source: http://loksabha.nic.in
Political Party
No. of MPs
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)
303
Indian National Congress (INC)
52
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK)
24
All India Trinamool Congress  (AITC)
22
Yuvajana Sramika Rythu Congress Party (YSRCP)
22
Shiv Sena (SS)
18
Janata Dal (United) (JD (U))
16
Biju Janata Dal (BJD)
12
Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP)
10
Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS)
9
Lok Jan Shakti Party (LJSP)
5
Samajwadi Party (SP)
5
Independents (Ind.)
4
Nationalist Congress Party (NCP)
4
Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI)(M))
3
Indian Union Muslim League (IUML)
3
Jammu and Kashmir National Conference (J&KNC)
3
Telugu Desam Party (TDP)
3
All India Majlis-e-Ittehadul Muslimeen (AIMIM)
2
Apna Dal (Apna Dal)
2
Communist Party of India (CPI)
2
Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD)
2
Aam Aadmi Party (AAP)
1
AJSU Party (AJSU)
1
All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK)
1
All India United Democratic Front (AIUDF)
1
Janata Dal (Secular) (JD(s))
1
Jharkhand Mukti Morcha (JMM)
1
Kerala Congress (M)(KC(M))
1
Mizo National Front (MNF)
1
Naga Peoples Front (NPF)
1
National People’s Party (NPP)
1
Nationalist Democratic Progressive Party (PDPP)
1
Rashtriya Loktantrik Party (RLP)
1
Revolutionary Socialist Party (RSP)
1
Sikkim Krantikari Morcha (SKM)
1
Viduthalai Chiruthaigal Katchi (VCK)
1
Grand Total
543
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
36
Once elected, these candidates become Members
of Parliament or MPs. These MPs together make
up the Parliament. Once elections to the
Parliament have taken place, the Parliament needs
to perform the following functions:
A. To Select the National Government
Parliament of India consists of the President, the Rajya
Sabha and the Lok Sabha. After the Lok Sabha elections,
a list is prepared showing how many MPs belong to
each political party. For a political party to form the
government, they must have a majority of elected MPs.
Since there are 543 elected members in Lok Sabha,
to have a majority a party should have at least half
the number i.e. 272 members or more. The
Opposition in Parliament is formed by all the
political parties that are not part of the majority
party/coalition formed. The largest amongst these
parties is called the Opposition party.
One of the most important functions of the Lok
Sabha is to select the executive. The executive, as
you read in Chapter 1, is a group of persons who
work together to implement the laws made by the
Parliament. This executive is often what we have
in mind when we use the term government.
The Prime Minister of India is the leader of the
ruling party in the Lok Sabha. From the MPs who
belong to her party, the Prime Minister selects
ministers to work with her to implement
decisions. These ministers then take charge of
different areas of government functioning like
health, education, finance etc.
Often times in the recent past it has been difficult
for a single political party to get the majority that
is required to form the government. They then
join together with different political parties who
are interested in similar concerns to form what is
known as a coalition government.
Results of the 15th Lok Sabha Elections,
(May 2009)
Political Party
No. of MPs
National Parties
Bahujan Samaj Party (BSP)
21
Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP)
116
Communist Party of India (CPI)
4
Communist Party of India (Marxist)
16
(CPM)
Indian National Congress (INC)
206
Nationalist Congress Party (NCP)
9
Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD)
4
State Parties (Regional Parties)
All India Anna DMK (AIADMK)
9
All India Forward Bloc
2
All India Trinamool Congress
19
Biju Janata Dal (BJD)
14
Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) 18
Jammu & Kashmir National Conference 3
Janata Dal (Secular)
3
Janata Dal (United)
20
Jharkhand Mukti Morcha
2
Muslim League Kerala State Committee 2
Revolutionary Socialist Party
2
Samajwadi Party (SP)
23
Shiromani Akali Dal
4
Shiv Sena
11
Telangana Rashtra Samithi (TRS)
2
Telugu Desam (TDP)
6
Other Regional Parties
6
Registered Unrecognised Parties
12
Independents
9
Grand Total
543
Source: www.eci.nic.in
The above table gives you the results of the 15th
Lok Sabha elections held in 2009. In these
elections, the INC got a large number of seats but
still not enough to emerge as the majority party in
the Lok Sabha. It, thus, had to form a coalition,
the United Progressive Alliance (UPA), with other
political parties who were its allies.
2024-25

37
The Rajya Sabha functions primarily as the representative
of the states of India in the Parliament. The Rajya Sabha
can also initiate legislation and a bill is required to pass
through the Rajya Sabha in order to become a law. It,
therefore, has an important role of reviewing and altering
(if alterations are needed) the laws initiated by the Lok
Sabha. The members of the Rajya Sabha are elected by the
elected members of the Legislative Assemblies of various
states. There are 233 elected members plus 12 members
nominated by the President.
B. To Control, Guide and Inform the Government
The Parliament, while in session, begins with a question hour.
The question hour is an important mechanism through which
MPs can elicit information about the working of the
government. This is a very important way through which
the Parliament controls the executive. By asking questions
the government is alerted to its shortcomings, and also comes
to know the opinion of the people through their
representatives in the Parliament, i.e. the MPs. Asking
questions of the government is a crucial task for every MP.
The Opposition parties play a critical role in the healthy
functioning of a democracy. They highlight drawbacks in
various policies and programmes of the government and
mobilise popular support for their own policies.
These two buildings of the Central Secretariat, the South Block and North Block were built during the 1930s. The photo on the left is of the  South
Block which houses the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO), the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of External Affairs. The North Block is the photo on
the right and this has the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Home Affairs. The other ministries of the Union Government are located in various
buildings in New Delhi.
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
38
Lok Sabha
Unstarred Question No: 48 Answered On: 15.12.2017
Converge of Schemes for Children
Manoj Rajoria
Will the Minister of Women and Child Development be pleased to state:-
(a) whether the Government proposes to converge various schemes and policies for children in
the country;
(b) if so, the details thereof; and;
(c) if not, the reasons therefor?
Answer
Minister of State in the Ministry of Women and Child Development (Dr. Virendra Kumar)
(a) to (c) The Ministry has developed the National Plan of Action for Children 2016 which
largely draws upon the existing programmes and schemes of various Ministries/Departments.
It provides a framework for convergence and co-ordination between Ministries/Departments
and State/UTs Governments and encourages collective action from all stakeholders to address
multi-dimensional vulnerabilities experienced by children. The National Plan of Action for
Children 2016 categorizes children's rights under four key priority areas; (i) Survival, Health
and Nutrition, (ii) Education and Development, (iii) Protection and (iv) Participation. It identifies
key programmes, schemes and policies as well as stakeholders for the implementation of
different strategies.
In the above question, what
In the above question, what
In the above question, what
In the above question, what
In the above question, what
information is being sought
information is being sought
information is being sought
information is being sought
information is being sought
from the Minister of Women
from the Minister of Women
from the Minister of Women
from the Minister of Women
from the Minister of Women
and Child Development?
and Child Development?
and Child Development?
and Child Development?
and Child Development?
If you were a Member of
If you were a Member of
If you were a Member of
If you were a Member of
If you were a Member of
Parliament (MP), list two
arliament (MP), list two
arliament (MP), list two
arliament (MP), list two
arliament (MP), list two
questions that you would like
questions that you would like
questions that you would like
questions that you would like
questions that you would like
to ask.
to ask.
to ask.
to ask.
to ask.
The government gets valuable feedback and is kept on its
toes by the questions asked by the MPs. In addition, in all
matters dealing with finances, the Parliament’s approval is
crucial for the government. This is one of the several ways
in which the Parliament controls, guides and informs the
government. The MPs as representatives of the people have
a central role in controlling, guiding and informing
Parliament and this is a key aspect of the functioning of
Indian democracy.
The following is an example of a question asked in Parliament.
Source: http://loksabha.nic.in
2024-25

39
The word ‘arbitrary’ has been used
earlier in this book and you’ve read
what the word means in the Glossary
of Chapter 1. The word ‘sedition’ has
been included in the Glossary of this
chapter. Read the Glossary
descriptions of both words and then
answer the following questions:
State one reason why you think the
Sedition Act of 1870 was arbitrary? In
what ways does the Sedition Act of
1870 contradict the rule of law?
Domestic violence generally refers to the injury or harm or threat of injury or harm
caused by an adult male, usually the husband, against his wife. Injury may be caused by
physically beating up the woman or by emotionally abusing her. Abuse of the woman can
also include verbal, sexual and economic abuse. The Protection of Women from Domestic
Violence Act 2005 extends the understanding of the term ‘domestic’ to include all
women who ‘live or have lived together in a shared household’ with the male member
who is perpetrating the violence.
How Do New Laws Come About?
The Parliament has an important role in making laws.
There are many ways through which this takes place
and it is often different groups in society that raise the
need for a particular law. An important role of
Parliament is to be sensitive to the problems faced by
people. Let us read the following story to understand
how issue of domestic violence was brought to the
attention of Parliament and the process adopted for
this issue to become law.
Sustainable Development Goal (SDG)
www.in.undp.org
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
40
April 1991: A typical day at their office...
Throughout the 1990s, the need for a new law was
raised in different forums.
In 1999, Lawyers Collective, a group of lawyers, law students and
activists, after nation-wide consultations took the lead in
drafting the Domestic Violence (Prevention and Protection) Bill.
This draft bill was widely circulated.
Kusum and Shazia work for a
women's organisation. They
remember the journey of how
the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act
got passed.
October 2006
Shazia, did you read today’s
newspapers? Isn’t it a great
day for women?
Not just women. Violence-free homes
will benefit everyone. Kusum, it’s taken
such a long time to get this law passed.
In fact, it began with establishing the
need for a new law.
I need advice. My husband beats me
up. I haven’t told anyone so far. I feel
so ashamed. I can’t go on like this
anymore. But I have nowhere to go.
I am being
ill-treated by my
son and daughter-
in-law. They
verbally abuse me. I
have no access to
my bank accounts.
They may even
throw me out.
I do not want to go to
the police. I just want
to stop the violence.
I just don’t want to
be thrown out of the
house I am living in.
Unfortunately
the existing law
is a criminal one
and does not offer
these options.
 We’ve heard testimonies of several women.
We’ve seen that women want protection
against being beaten, the right to continue
living in a shared household and often
temporary relief. We need a new civil law to
address this issue.
The law should cover any women
living within a shared domestic space.
They should be protected from being
evicted from the shared household.
What about some
monetary relief?
The definition of
domestic violence
should include
physical, economic,
sexual and verbal and
emotional abuse.
2024-25

41
Finally, the Bill was introduced in Parliament in 2002 but …
In December 2002, the Standing
Committee submitted its
recommendations to the Rajya Sabha and
these were also tabled in the Lok Sabha.
The Committee’s report accepted most of
the demands of the women’s groups.
Finally a new bill, was reintroduced in
Parliament in 2005. After being passed in
both houses of Parliament, it was sent to
the President for his assent. The
Protection of Women from Domestic
Violence Act came into effect in 2006.
At a press conference in
October 2006
Meetings were held with different organisations.
This law is a first in recognising a
woman’s right to a violence-free
home and provides a comprehensive
definition of domestic violence.
The women’s movement want a
new law on Domestic Violence.
The Government should introduce
it in parliament soon.
This Bill has
none of what
we have been
suggesting.
We must oppose
the Bill in its
present form.
The law needs to provide
for temporary custody of
children …
What is this new law?
This is a civil law aimed at
providing relief to millions of
women, including wives,
mothers, daughters and
sisters affected by violence
in their homes.
Let’s have a press
conference … we
could also start an
on-line petition.
Several women’s organisations, National Commission for Women
made submissions to the Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Esteemed members of the Parliamentary
Standing Committee... the present Bill must be
changed. We do not agree with the definition
of domestic violence being proposed …
The press conference continues...
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
42
What do you understand by ‘domestic violence’? List the
two rights that the new law helped achieve for women who
are survivors of violence.
Can you list one process that was used to make more people
aware of the need for this law?
From the above storyboard, can you list two different ways in
which people lobbied Parliament?
Often women who face
violence or are abused are
seen as victims. But women
struggle in several different
ways to survive these
situations. Therefore, it is
more accurate to refer to
them as survivors rather
than as victims.
In the following poster, what
do you understand by the
phrase ‘Equal Relationships are
Violence Free’?
Yes, now the government
has to ensure that this
law is implemented and
enforced.
Now begins another
long journey …
This law is a very significant step because it
recognises ... The right of women to live in a
shared household... women can get a
protection order against any further
violence... Women can get monetary relief to
meet their expenses including medical costs.
Why is this an
important law?
2024-25

43
As the above example shows, the role of citizens is crucial in
helping Parliament frame different concerns that people might
have into laws. From establishing the need for a new law to its
being passed, at every stage of the process the voice of the
citizen is a crucial element. This voice can be heard through
TV reports, newspaper editorials, radio broadcasts, local
meetings - all of which help in making the work that Parliament
does more accessible and transparent to the people.
Unpopular and Controversial Laws
Let us now look at the situation where the Parliament passes
laws that turn out to be very unpopular. Sometimes a law can
be constitutionally valid and hence legal, but it can continue to
be unpopular and unacceptable to people because they feel
that the intention behind it is unfair and harmful. Hence, people
might criticise this law, hold public meetings, write about it in
newspapers, report to TV news channels etc. In a democracy
like ours, citizens can express their unwillingness to accept
repressive laws framed by the Parliament. When a large number
of people begin to feel that a wrong law has been passed, then
there is pressure on the Parliament to change this.
For example, various municipal laws on the use of space within
municipal limits often make hawking and street vending illegal.
No one will dispute the necessity for some rules to keep the
public space open so that people can walk on the pavements
easily. However, one also cannot deny that hawkers and
vendors provide essential services cheaply and efficiently to
the millions living in a large city. This is their means of
livelihood. Hence, if the law favours one group and disregards
the other it will be controversial and lead to conflict. People
who think that the law is not fair can approach the court to
decide on the issue. The court has the power to modify or
cancel laws if it finds that they don’t adhere to the Constitution.
Do you remember the photo essay on the women’s movement
in the Class VII book? The photos there showed the different
ways in which citizens can protest, campaign and show solidarity.
The pictures given on the next page point to another way in
which people protest unjust laws.
As you have read in your
previous class and will read
in your history textbooks
this year on the rule of law,
Indian nationalists
protested and criticised
arbitrary and repressive
laws being enforced by the
British. History provides us
with several examples of
people and communities
who have struggled to end
unjust laws. In your Class
VII book, you read of how
Rosa Parks, an African-
American woman, refused
to give up her seat on a
bus to a white man on 1
December 1955. She was
protesting the law on
segregation that divided up
all public spaces, including
the streets, between the
whites and the African-
Americans. Her refusal was
a key event that marked
the start of the Civil Rights
Movement, which led to
the Civil Rights Act in
1964, which prohibited
discrimination on the basis
of race, religion or national
origin in the U.S.A.
The above photo shows
Rosa Parks seated in a bus.
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25

Social and Political Life
44
Approval: To give one’s consent to and be favourable towards something. In the context of
this chapter, it refers both to the formal consent (through elected representatives) that
Parliament has as well as the fact that it needs to continue to enjoy the people’s trust.
Coalition: A temporary alliance of groups or parties. In this chapter, it refers to the alliance
formed by political parties after elections when no party has been able to get adequate
seats to form a clear majority.
Criticise: To find fault with or disapprove of a person or thing. In the context of this chapter,
it refers to citizens finding fault with the functioning of government.
Evolution: Process of development from a simple to a complex form and is often used to
discuss the development of a species of plants or animals. In the context of this chapter it
refers to the way in which protecting women against domestic violence developed from an
urgently-felt need to a new law that can be enforced throughout the country.
Read the newspapers/watch news
on TV for a week and find out if
there are any unpopular laws that
people in India or around the
world are currently protesting.
List the three forms of protest
that you see in the above
photos.
We need to remember that our role as citizens does not end
with electing our representatives. Rather, it is then that we
begin to use newspapers and the media to carefully chart the
work that is being done by our MPs and criticise their actions
when we feel it is required. Thus, what we should bear in mind
is that it is the extent, involvement and enthusiasm of the
people that helps Parliament perform its representative
functions properly.
GLOSSARY
2024-25

45
1. Why do you think our national movement supported the
idea that all adults have a right to vote?
2. In this 2004 map of Parliamentary constituencies
alongside, roughly identify the constituencies in your
State. What is the name of the MP from your
constituency? How many MPs does your state have?
Why are certain constituencies coloured green while
others are coloured blue?
Exercises
3. You have read in Chapter 1 that the
‘Parliamentary form of government’ that exists
in India has three tiers. This includes the
Parliament (central government) and the
various State Legislatures (state governments).
Fill in the following table with information on
the various representatives from your area:
Source: www.eci.gov.in
State Government
Central Government
Which political party/parties is/are
currently in power?
Who (name) is the current
representative from your area?
Which political parties currently
form the Opposition?
When were elections last held?
When will the next elections
be held?
How many women representatives
are there (from your state)?
Sedition: This applies to anything that the government might consider as stirring up resistance or rebellion
against it. In such cases, the government does not need absolute evidence in order to arrest persons.
Under the Sedition Act of 1870, the British had a very broad interpretation of what constituted sedition,
and what this meant was that they could arrest and detain any person they wanted under this Act. The
nationalists considered this law arbitrary because persons were arrested for a variety of reasons that were
seldom clarified beforehand as well as because those arrested were often kept in jail without a trial.
Repressive: To control severely in order to prevent free and natural development or expression. In the
context of this chapter it refers to laws that brutally control persons and often prevent them from exercising
their Fundamental Rights including Right to Speech and Assembly.
Unresolved: Situations in which there are no easy solutions to problems.
4. Re-read the storyboard on how a new law on domestic violence got passed. Describe in your
own words the different ways in which women’s groups worked to make this happen.
Chapter 3: Parliament and the Making of Laws
2024-25
