2
IS M
 M
 M
 M
 MATTER
ATTER
ATTER
ATTER
ATTER A
 A
 A
 A
 AROUND
ROUND
ROUND
ROUND
ROUND U
 U
 U
 U
 US P
 P
 P
 P
 PURE
URE
URE
URE
URE
C hapter
Multiple Choice Questions
1.
Which of the following statements are true for pure substances?
(i) Pure substances contain only one kind of particles
(ii) Pure substances may be compounds or mixtures
(iii) Pure substances have the same composition throughout
(iv) Pure substances can be exemplified by all elements other than nickel
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (i) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (ii) and (iii)
2.
Rusting of an article made up of iron is called
(a) corrosion and it is a physical as well as chemical change
(b) dissolution and it is a physical change
(c) corrosion and it is a chemical change
(d) dissolution and it is a chemical change
3.
A mixture of sulphur and carbon disulphide is
(a) heterogeneous and shows Tyndall effect
(b) homogeneous and shows Tyndall effect
(c) heterogeneous and does not show Tyndall effect
(d) homogeneous and does not show Tyndall effect
4.
Tincture of iodine has antiseptic properties. This solution is made by
dissolving
(a) iodine in potassium iodide
(b) iodine in vaseline
(c) iodine in water
(d) iodine in alcohol
5.
Which of the following are homogeneous in nature?
(i) ice
(ii) wood
(iii) soil
(iv) air
(a) (i) and (iii)
(b) (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i) and (iv)
(d) (iii) and (iv)
16-04-2018

6.
Which of the following are physical changes?
(i) Melting of iron metal
(ii) Rusting of iron
(iii) Bending of an iron rod
(iv) Drawing a wire of iron metal
(a) (i), (ii) and (iii)
(b) (i), (ii) and (iv)
(c) (i), (iii) and (iv)
(d) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
7.
Which of the following are chemical changes?
(i) Decaying of wood
(ii) Burning of wood
(iii) Sawing of wood
(iv) Hammering of a nail into a piece of wood
(a) (i) and (ii)
(b) (ii) and (iii)
(c) (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i) and (iv)
8.
Two substances, A and B were made to react to form a third substance,
A2B according to the following reaction
2 A + B → A2 B
Which of the following statements concerning this reaction are incorrect?
(i) The product A2B shows the properties of substances A and B
(ii) The product will always have a fixed composition
(iii) The product so formed cannot be classified as a compound
(iv) The product so formed is an element
(a) (i), (ii) and (iii),
(b) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(c) (i), (iii) and (iv)
(d) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
9.
Two chemical species X and Y combine together to form a product P which
contains both X and Y
X + Y → P
X and Y cannot be broken down into simpler substances by simple chemical
reactions. Which of the following concerning the species X, Y and P are correct?
(i) P is a compound
(ii) X and Y are compounds
(iii) X and Y are elements
13
IS MATTER AROUND US PURE
16-04-2018

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS
14
(iv) P has a fixed composition
(a) (i), (ii) and (iii),
(b) (i), (ii) and (iv)
(c) (ii), (iii) and (iv)
(d) (i), (iii) and (iv)
Short Answer Questions
10.
Suggest separation technique(s) one would need to employ to
separate the following mixtures.
(a) Mercury and water
(b) Potassium chloride and ammonium chloride
(c) Common salt, water and sand
(d) Kerosene oil, water and salt
11.
Which of the tubes in Fig. 2.1 (a) and (b) will be more
effective as a condenser in the distillation apparatus?
12.
Salt can be recovered from its solution by evaporation.
Suggest some other technique for the same?
13.
The  ‘sea-water’  can be classified as a homogeneous
as well as  heterogeneous mixture. Comment.
14.
While diluting a solution of salt in water,  a student by
mistake added acetone (boiling point 56°C). What technique can be
employed to get back the acetone? Justify your choice.
15.
What would you observe when
(a) a saturated solution of potassium chloride prepared at 60°C is allowed
to cool to room temperature.
(b) an aqueous sugar solution is heated to dryness.
(c) a mixture of iron filings and sulphur powder is heated strongly.
16.
Explain why particles of a colloidal solution do not settle down when left
undisturbed, while in the case of a suspension they do.
17.
Smoke and fog both are aerosols. In what way are they different?
18.
Classify the following as physical or chemical properties
(a) The composition of a sample of steel is: 98% iron, 1.5% carbon and
0.5% other elements.
(b) Zinc dissolves in hydrochloric acid with the evolution of hydrogen gas.
(c) Metallic sodium is soft enough to be cut with a knife.
(d) Most metal oxides form alkalis on interacting with water.
(a)
    (b)
Fig. 2.1
16-04-2018

IS MATTER AROUND US PURE
15
19.
The teacher instructed three students  ‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ respectively to prepare
a 50% (mass by volume) solution of sodium hydroxide (NaOH). ‘A’ dissolved
50g of NaOH in 100 mL of water, ‘B’ dissolved 50g of NaOH in 100g of
water while ‘C’ dissolved 50g of NaOH in water to make 100 mL of solution.
Which one of them has made the desired solution and why?
20.
Name the process associated with the following
(a) Dry ice is kept at room temperature and at  one atmospheric pressure.
(b) A drop of ink placed on the surface of water contained in a glass spreads
throughout the water.
(c) A potassium permanganate crystal is in a beaker and water is poured
into the beaker with stirring.
(d) A acetone bottle is left open and the bottle becomes empty.
(e) Milk is churned to separate cream from it.
(f) Settling of sand when a mixture of sand and water is left undisturbed
for some time.
(g) Fine beam of light entering through a small hole in a dark room,
illuminates the particles in its paths.
21.
You are given two samples of water labelled as ‘A’ and ‘B’. Sample ‘A’ boils
at 100°C and sample ‘B’ boils at 102°C. Which sample of water will not
freeze at 0°C?  Comment.
22.
What are the favourable qualities given to gold when it is alloyed with copper
or silver for the purpose of making ornaments?
23.
An element is sonorous and highly ductile. Under which category would
you classify this element? What other characteristics do you expect the
element to possess?
24.
Give an example each for the mixture having the following characteristics.
Suggest a suitable method to separate the components of these mixtures
(a) A volatile and a non-volatile component.
(b) Two volatile components with appreciable difference in boiling points.
(c) Two immiscible liquids.
(d) One of the components changes directly from solid to gaseous state.
(e) Two or more coloured constituents soluble in some solvent.
25.
Fill in the blanks
(a) A colloid is a ——— mixture and its components can be separated by
the technique known as  ———.
(b) Ice, water and water vapour look different and display different ——
properties but they are ——— the same.
(c) A mixture of chloroform and water taken in a separating funnel is mixed
and left undisturbed for some time. The upper layer in the separating
funnel will be of——— and the lower layer will be that of  ———.
(d) A mixture of two or more miscible liquids, for which the difference in
the boiling points is less than 25 K can be separated by the process
called———.
16-04-2018

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS
16
(e) When light is passed through water containing a few drops of milk, it
shows a bluish tinge. This is due to the ——— of light by milk and the
phenomenon is called  ——— . This indicates that milk is a ———
solution.
26.
Sucrose (sugar) crystals obtained from sugarcane and beetroot are mixed
together. Will it be a pure substance or a mixture? Give reasons for the
same.
27.
Give some examples of  Tyndall effect observed in your surroundings?
28.
Can we separate alcohol dissolved in water by using a separating funnel?
If yes, then describe the procedure.
If not, explain.
29.
On heating calcium carbonate gets converted into calcium oxide and carbon
dioxide.
(a) Is this a physical or a chemical change?
(b) Can you prepare one acidic and one basic solution by using the
products formed in the above process? If so, write the chemical equation
involved.
30.
Non metals are usually poor conductors of heat and electricity. They are
non-lustrous, non-sonorous, non-malleable and are  coloured.
(a) Name a lustrous non-metal.
(b) Name a non-metal which exists as a liquid at room temperature.
(c) The allotropic form of a non-metal is a good conductor of electricity.
Name the allotrope.
(d) Name a non-metal which is known to form the largest number of
compounds.
(e) Name a non-metal other than carbon which shows allotropy.
(f) Name a non-metal which is required for combustion.
31.
Classify the substances given in Fig. 2.2 into elements and compounds
Fig. 2.2
16-04-2018

IS MATTER AROUND US PURE
17
32.
Which of the following are not compounds?
(a) Chlorine gas
(b) Potassium chloride
(c) Iron
(d) Iron sulphide
(e) Aluminium
(f) Iodine
(g) Carbon
(h) Carbon monoxide
(i) Sulphur powder
Long Answer Questions
33.
Fractional distillation is suitable for separation of miscible liquids with a
boiling point difference of about 25 K or less. What part of fractional
distillation apparatus makes it efficient and possess an advantage over a
simple distillation process. Explain using a diagram.
34.
(a)  Under which category of mixtures will you classify alloys and why?
(b) A solution is always a liquid. Comment.
(c) Can a solution be heterogeneous?
35.
Iron filings and sulphur were mixed together and divided into two parts,
‘A’ and ‘B’. Part ‘A’ was heated strongly while Part ‘B’ was not heated. Dilute
hydrochloric acid was added to both the Parts and evolution of gas was
seen in both the cases. How will you identify the gases evolved?
36.
A child wanted to separate the mixture of dyes constituting a
sample of ink. He marked a line by the ink on the filter paper and
placed the filter paper in a glass containing water as shown in
Fig.2.3. The filter paper was removed when the water moved near
the top of the filter paper.
(i) What would you expect to see, if the ink contains three different
coloured components?
(ii) Name the technique used by the child.
(iii) Suggest one more application of this technique.
37.
A group of students took an old shoe box
and covered it with a black paper from all
sides. They fixed a source of light (a torch)
at one end of the box by making a hole in it
and made another hole on the other side to
view the  light. They placed a milk sample
contained in a beaker/tumbler in the box
as shown in the Fig.2.4. They were amazed
to see that milk taken in the tumbler was
Fig. 2.4
Fig. 2.3
16-04-2018

EXEMPLAR PROBLEMS
18
illuminated. They tried the same activity by taking a salt solution but found
that light simply passed through it?
(a) Explain why the milk sample was illuminated. Name the phenomenon
involved.
(b) Same results were not observed with a salt solution. Explain.
(c) Can you suggest two more solutions which would show the same effect
as shown by the milk solution?
38.
Classify each of the following, as a physical or a chemical change. Give
reasons.
(a) Drying of a shirt in the sun.
(b) Rising of hot air over a radiator.
(c) Burning of kerosene in a lantern.
(d) Change in the colour of black tea on adding lemon juice to it.
(e) Churning of milk cream to get butter.
39.
During an experiment the students were asked to prepare a 10% (Mass/Mass)
solution of sugar in water. Ramesh dissolved 10g of sugar in 100g of water
while Sarika prepared it by dissolving 10g of sugar in water to make 100g
of the solution.
(a)  Are the two solutions of the same concentration
(b) Compare the mass % of the two solutions.
40.
You are provided with a mixture containing sand, iron filings, ammonium
chloride and sodium chloride. Describe the procedures you would use to
separate these constituents from the mixture?
41.
Arun has prepared 0.01% (by mass) solution of sodium chloride in water.
Which of the following correctly represents the composition of the solutions?
(a) 1.00 g of NaCl + 100g of water
(b) 0.11g of NaCl + 100g of water
(c) 0.0l g of NaCl + 99.99g of water
(d) 0.10 g of NaCl + 99.90g of water
42.
Calculate the mass of sodium sulphate required to prepare its 20% (mass
percent) solution in 100g of water?
16-04-2018
