How Forces Affect 
Motion
Chapter 
6
In Chapter 4, you learnt to describe the motion of an object in terms 
of its position, velocity and acceleration. But you did not consider 
what causes motion. Is there an underlying cause for a change in 
position and velocity of an object? What is the nature of this cause? 
Do all motions require a cause? In this chapter, we will investigate 
what causes changes in the motion of objects. We will also discuss 
Newton’s three laws of motion and learn how to apply them.
6.1 The Concept of Force
You may recall learning earlier that a force can make an 
object move from rest, change the speed and direction 
of motion of a moving object, and can even change the 
shape of an object. For example, a ball at rest starts moving when 
you apply a force, a force applied by a cricket bat on a cricket ball 
changes its direction, and a lemon can be squeezed by the force 
applied by your fingers (Fig. 6.1).
(c) Squeezing a lemon
Fig. 6.1: Applying force on different objects
(b) Striking a ball
(a) Kicking a ball
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Think It Over
	y
Why does a canoe 
move forward 
when the canoeist 
pushes water 
backwards with 
their paddle and 
why does it move 
faster when they 
push harder?
	y
Suppose the same 
canoeist uses the 
same paddle force 
in two different 
canoes, one empty 
and one carrying 
another passenger. 
In which case will 
the canoe move 
faster?

How Forces Affect Motion
95
Fig. 6.3: (a) Pushing a box 
kept on table or floor
Force by hand
Force of friction
Fig. 6.2: Measuring the 
weight of an object using a 
spring balance
While learning about force earlier, did you notice that whenever any 
type of force acting on an object was described, its direction was also 
specified? For example, the phrases used were, force of friction acting on 
an object in a direction opposite to the direction of its motion; like poles of 
a magnet repelling each other or unlike poles attracting each other due to 
the magnetic force; like charges repelling or unlike charges attracting each 
other due to the electrostatic force; the Earth attracting objects towards 
itself due to the gravitational force; buoyant force exerted by liquid in an 
upward direction on an object placed in it, and so on. Force is a physical 
quantity for which we need to specify direction along with its magnitude 
and unit, just like for the physical quantities — position, displacement, 
velocity and acceleration of an object which were introduced in Chapter 4. 
The SI unit of force is the newton (written with a small ‘n’) and its symbol 
is N. The magnitude of the force expresses its strength.
If either the magnitude or direction, or the both, of a force applied on an 
object changes, the effect of the force also changes.
Note
6.1.1 Measuring the magnitude of a force
How can we measure the magnitude of a force? Do you remember using 
a spring balance earlier to measure the weight of objects (Fig. 6.2)? Do you 
also remember that the weight of an object is the gravitational force with 
which the Earth pulls the object? A spring balance can be used to measure 
not just the weight of an object but the magnitude of the force in general. 
If you pull on the free end of the spring balance, it measures the force with 
which you pull on the spring inside the balance.
In everyday life, the smallest forces we can directly feel are of the order of 
millinewtons (10–3 N), such as a light touch. Scientists, however, can measure 
forces far smaller than this, down to yoctonewtons (10  –24 N) in specialised 
experiments (as of 2026).
Threads of Curiosity
6.2 Balanced and Unbalanced Forces
In real life, situations seldom exist where only one force acts on an object. 
Usually, there is more than one force acting on an object. For example, when 
you are pushing a box placed on a surface then, apart from the force with 
which you are pushing it, the force of friction is also acting on the box in the 
direction opposite to that of the motion (Fig. 6.3a).
Or, take the example of a ball floating on water (Fig. 6.3b). Two forces 
are acting upon it — gravitational force by the Earth acting downwards and 
buoyant force applied by the liquid acting upwards. In such cases, what is 
the effect of forces when more than one force is acting on an object at rest 
or in motion? 
Have you ever played a game of tug of war where two teams pull at 
a rope in opposite directions? If both the teams pull the rope with equal 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Fig. 6.3: (b) A ball 
floating on water
Buoyant force
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 4
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Gravitational 
force

96
Exploration|Grade 9
force, the rope does not move 
(Fig. 6.4a). Such two forces, which 
are equal in magnitude but opposite 
in direction are called balanced 
forces. However, if one team pulls 
harder, i.e., it applies a force of 
larger magnitude, the forces are 
no longer balanced and the rope 
moves in the direction of the larger 
force (Fig. 6.4b). The rope does not 
move if the forces applied on it are 
balanced but moves if the forces are 
unbalanced.
If the forces applied on an object are not balanced, a non-zero net force 
acts on the object. When two forces are opposite in direction but unequal in 
magnitude (Fig. 6.4b), the magnitude of net force is equal to the difference 
between the magnitudes of two forces and the direction is along the force 
of the larger magnitude.
Now, think of a situation where two people are 
applying forces in the same direction on a stalled car 
to make it move (Fig. 6.5). In this case, the magnitude 
of the net force applied by them on the car is the sum 
of the magnitudes of two forces. The direction of the 
net force is in the same direction as the two individual 
forces.
Example 6.1: Two forces of 10 N and 6 N are acting on a block lying on the 
table as shown in Fig. 6.6. What is the magnitude and the direction of the 
net force acting on the block in each case?
Fig. 6.6: Two forces acting on a block in three different manner
10 N
6 N
(a)
10 N
6 N
(b)
10 N
6 N
(c)
Answer: 
(a)	 Net force = 10 N + 6 N = 16 N, acting towards the right side.
(b)	 Net force = 10 N – 6 N = 4 N, acting towards the right side.
(c)	 Net force = 10 N – 6 N = 4 N, acting towards the left side.
There are situations in which forces do not act parallel or 
opposite to each other but act at an angle to each other. You 
will learn in higher grades how to calculate the net force 
in such cases. Also, there are situations where equal and 
opposite forces are applied to the two ends of an extended 
object which make the object rotate (Fig. 6.7). For example, 
applying equal and opposite forces to a handlebar or a tap 
makes it turn. You will also learn about this in higher grades.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 6.7: Equal and opposite 
forces on an extended object
Next
Level
Up
(a)
Fig. 6.4: Two forces applied in opposite direction of (a) equal 
magnitudes, (b) unequal magnitudes
(b)
Net force
Fig. 6.5: Two forces applied in the same direction
Net force

How Forces Affect Motion
97
6.3 The Force of Friction: Often 
Overlooked but Always Present 
You have learnt about the force of friction in an 
earlier grade but now let us learn more about it. 
Suppose an object is kept at rest on the floor and 
you apply a force on it in the forward direction (Fig. 6.10). 
Will the force applied by you make the object move? Many 
a times, you might have experienced that on applying a 
force on an object, it did not move and you had to apply a 
larger force to move it. Why is it so?
It is due to the force of friction arising between the 
bottom surface of the box and the floor acting in a direction 
opposite to the direction of the force applied by you. The 
box will start moving when the force applied by you is of 
larger magnitude than the force of friction, so that a net 
force acts on the box in the direction of its motion. 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
For an object being pushed, apart from the applied force and 
the force of friction, some other forces may also be acting on 
it (Fig. 6.11). One of these is the gravitational force (weight) 
and the other is the force exerted by the surface on which it is 
placed called the normal force. The weight acts in the downwards 
direction, whereas the normal force acts in the upward direction 
perpendicular to the surface. However, the two forces are balanced.
Air around the object also exerts a force of friction on the 
box when the box moves through the air, but in many cases its 
magnitude is so small that it can be neglected.
Ready to Go Beyond
Applied 
force
Gravitational 
force
Normal force
Force of friction
Fig. 6.11: Forces acting on an object
For the situation shown in Fig. 6.10, once the box starts moving and you 
stop applying the force on it, the box slows down and comes to a stop. You 
must have experienced this in many cases around you. You stop pedalling 
a bicycle and after some time it comes to rest after travelling some distance. 
You stop pushing a ball and it also comes to rest after travelling some 
distance. Does it mean that you need to continuously apply a force to keep 
Fig. 6.10: A box being pushed
Net force
1.	 A weightlifter lifts a barbell (Fig. 6.8). List 
two forces that are acting on the barbell. Are 
these forces balanced if the weightlifter keeps 
the barbell steady? 
2.	 Two players R and S are participating in an 
arm-wrestling match (Fig. 6.9). At the instant, 
when the arms tilt to the front direction 
(out of the page towards you), are the forces 
exerted by the players balanced? If not, which 
player exerted the larger force?
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 6.8: A weightlifter 
lifting barbell
Fig. 6.9: Arm-wrestling 
match
R
S
Multiple forces may act on an 
object, but its motion depends 
only on the net force.
Note

98
Exploration|Grade 9
it moving? On a moving object, we have to continuously apply a force to 
counter the force of friction. Otherwise, the force of friction acting against 
the direction of motion brings the object to rest.
Do you remember doing an activity in an earlier grade where 
you found that the force of friction depends upon the nature of 
the surfaces in contact? Let us carry out a similar activity here.
Activity 6.1: Let us investigate
1.	 Collect four coins of ` 10, one large strong rubber band and an adhesive 
tape. Locate horizontal surfaces of different materials, such as wooden 
table top, cemented floor, laminated table top, and polished marble 
or tiled floor (you may also choose other surfaces). Check that the 
surfaces are level.
2.	 Stack the four coins on top of each other and secure them together 
with an adhesive tape around the sides.
3.	 Hold the rubber band slightly stretched between your forefinger and 
thumb on the wooden table top (Fig. 6.12a). Mark points A and B at its 
ends as shown in Fig. 6.12b. Make another mark C up to which you will 
stretch the rubber band.
Fig. 6.12: (a) Rubber band slightly stretched between your forefinger and thumb, (b) marks A, B, C 
on the surface, and (c) rubber band stretched back to point C with stack of 4 coins
(a)
(b)
(c)
 C
A 
A 
B
B
C
4.	 Holding the ends of the rubber band at A and B, place the stack of coins 
near the middle of A and B. Now, using a finger of your other hand, 
push back the stack of coins till the rubber band is pulled back to the 
mark C (Fig. 6.12c). Then, release the stack of coins and observe its 
motion. Do you find that after losing contact with the rubber band, the 
velocity of the stack of coins decreases gradually and it comes to rest 
after travelling some distance? Measure the distance travelled from C 
and record it. Repeat this step twice. 
5.	 Repeat steps 3 and 4 for laminated table top while ensuring that the 
points A, B and C are marked at the same distances as earlier. Does 
the stack of coins travel a larger distance than it did on the wooden 
table top before coming to rest? Does its velocity decrease more 
slowly now?
6.	 Next, repeat step 5 on a horizontal polished marble or tile floor. 
Does the stack of coins travel an even larger distance and its velocity 
decrease even more slowly? What conclusion do you draw from your 
observations?
Before you release the stack of coins, it is stationary. It means that the 
forces acting upon it are balanced. Upon release, the force applied by you 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
What if ...
the force 
of friction 
disappears in 
the world? How 
will the motion 
of objects be 
impacted?

How Forces Affect Motion
99
Fig. 6.13: Force acting on the stack of 
coins (a) due to the stretched rubber 
band and friction upon release of rubber 
band, and (b) only due to friction
(a)
(b)
Force of friction
B
B
Force of friction
Force due to 
rubber band
vanishes and the force applied by the stretched rubber 
band in the forward direction on the stack of coins sets 
it moving. The coins start moving means that the force 
applied by the rubber band is larger than the force of 
friction and a net force acts on stack of coins in the forward 
direction (Fig. 6.13a). Due to the net force, the velocity of 
stack of coins changes from zero to a certain value, i.e., 
the net force provides an acceleration in the forward 
direction.
However, the moment the stack of coins loses contact 
with the rubber band, the force due to the rubber band is 
no longer acting upon it. But the force of friction continues 
to act upon the stack of coins in the direction opposite to 
their motion (Fig. 6.13b). It gradually decreases its velocity 
and finally brings it to rest. 
Even though the rubber band is stretched by the same amount in each 
case, the distance travelled by the stack of coins on different surfaces 
changes. This indicates that the force of friction on these surfaces is 
different. But how can you check if the force of friction is indeed different 
for different surfaces?
Activity 6.2: Let us measure
1.	 Take a spring balance and a wooden block.
2.	 Place the spring balance in a horizontal position on one of the surfaces 
used in Activity 6.1 and check that its scale reading is zero. Attach the 
wooden block to the hook of the spring balance as shown in Fig. 6.14.
 
Fig. 6.14: A block being pulled by a spring balance
3.	 Pull the spring balance with gradually increasing force and note down 
the reading on it when the block just starts moving. What does this 
reading indicate? The forces acting on the block are the force applied 
by the spring on it and the force of friction. If the velocity of the block 
is neither increasing nor decreasing, what can you say about the net 
force acting on the block? Does the reading of the spring balance 
indicate the magnitude of the force of friction acting on the wooden 
block?
4.	 Now repeat step 3 on the remaining three surfaces from Activity 6.1. 
5.	 Compare the readings of the spring balance for all surfaces. Are the 
readings different? Is the reading smallest for the surface on which the 
stack of coins travelled the largest distance? Is the reading largest for 
which the distance travelled was the smallest?
The reading of the spring balance gives an approximate measure of the 
force of friction acting between the surface of the block and the surface 
A
A

100
Exploration|Grade 9
on which it moves. A smaller reading indicates a smaller force of friction, 
while a larger reading indicates a larger force of friction. From Activities 6.1 
and 6.2, we conclude that when the force of friction is smaller, the velocity 
of the stack of coins decreases more slowly, and it travels a larger distance 
before coming to rest.
Now, conduct a thought experiment. We do a thought experiment when the conditions required 
for the experiment are difficult to recreate in the real world. Suppose, you find an object and 
a horizontal floor having such smooth surfaces that the force of friction between them is zero. 
Imagine, what will happen if you repeat steps 3 and 4 of Activity 6.1 with such an object and a 
horizontal floor? Will the velocity of the object decrease? Will the object ever come to rest or 
continue moving forever?
Think as a Scientist
Meet a Scientist
In ancient times, it was 
well recognised that a 
force was required to 
move a stationary object 
or to stop a moving 
object. But was a force 
required to keep an object moving 
with a constant velocity? For ages, it 
was mistakenly thought that a force 
was indeed required to maintain an 
object in such a motion. It was only in 
the 17th century that Galileo Galilei 
argued through a series of thought 
experiments that if a body moves along 
a horizontal plane and all impediments 
to its motion are removed, it will 
continue to move indefinitely.
Meet a Scientist
Isaac Newton used the 
word ‘inertia’ to describe 
the tendency of objects 
to resist change in their 
state of rest or uniform 
motion, and used this 
idea to frame his first 
law of motion. Along with this, Newton 
presented two more laws of motion in 
1687. The formulation of these three 
laws of motion was a defining moment 
in the history of science. The unit of force 
is named after Newton. Remember that 
when a unit is named after a person, 
its full form begins with the small case 
(newton and not Newton) while its 
symbol is capitalised (N and not n).
6.4 Newton’s First Law of Motion
Newton’s first law of motion can be stated as:
An object at rest remains at rest, and an object in motion continues to move 
with a constant velocity, unless a net force acts upon the object.
In other words, we can say that if the net force acting on an object is 
zero, the body cannot begin to move or change its velocity. In such a case, 
its acceleration is zero.
An object at rest means that it has zero velocity. Remember that constant 
velocity means that there is no change in the magnitude or the direction of 
velocity. If this constant velocity is non-zero, the motion is in a straight line in 
the same direction and the magnitude of velocity remains the same. 
Note

How Forces Affect Motion
101
Example 6.2: A person is exerting a force on a moving box in the 
forward direction which is equal to the force of friction acting between 
the bottom surface of the box and the floor. Will the box continue 
moving or will it come to rest after some time? 
Answer: The force of friction will be acting on the box in the backward 
direction. The two forces acting on the box are equal and opposite, 
and thus, they balance each other. The net force acting on the box is 
zero and as per the Newton’s first law of motion, the box will continue 
moving with constant velocity. 
Example 6.3: Draw (i) position-time, and (ii) velocity-time graphs for 
an object on which no net force is acting.
Answer: When no net force is acting on an object, there are two 
possibilities — either the object is at rest or the object is moving 
with a constant velocity. If the object is at rest, its position will 
not change with time and its position-time graph is as shown in 
Fig. 6.15a. Its velocity will remain zero and its velocity-time graph 
is shown in Fig. 6.15b. If the object is moving with constant velocity 
and no net force is acting upon it, it will continue moving with the 
same velocity and the velocity-time graph is shown in Fig. 6.16b. The
position-time graph will be a straight line as shown in Fig. 6.16a.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.15: When the object is at rest, its 
(a) position-time graph, 
(b) velocity-time graph
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6.16: When the object is moving with 
a constant velocity, its (a) position-time 
graph, (b) velocity-time graph
Time
0
Velocity
Position
Time
0
Time
0
Velocity
Time
Position
0
3.	 An object is moving with a constant velocity. Is there a net force acting upon it?
4.	 Suppose, no net force is acting on an object. Which of the following situations 
are possible?
	
(i)	 Object remains at rest if at rest. 
	
(ii)	 Object keeps moving with a constant velocity if already moving.
	 (iii)	 Object is moving with a constant acceleration.
5.	 In the real world, it is difficult to find a situation where no forces are acting on an 
object. But by applying additional forces, a condition can be achieved where the net 
force on the object is zero. Explain with the help of an example. 
Pause and Ponder
Newton’s first law of motion describes the motion of objects in the 
absence of a net force. It is natural to ask what happens to the motion 
of an object when there is a net force acting upon it. Newton’s second 
law of motion addresses this issue.
Note
If the force of 
friction is zero, a 
net force will have 
to be applied to 
an object at rest to 
set it moving. But 
once the object 
is moving, no 
further force is 
required to keep 
it moving with a 
constant velocity. 
However, to 
change the velocity 
(magnitude or 
direction), or to 
stop a moving 
object, a force will 
have to be applied.

102
Exploration|Grade 9
6.5 Newton’s Second Law of Motion
You know that a force can set an object in motion, bring it to rest, or change 
its velocity. A change in velocity means that the object is accelerating. Thus, 
a force produces acceleration. But what is the relationship between the net 
force acting on an object and its acceleration?
From our everyday experiences, you know that if a ball is pushed gently, it moves slowly starting 
from rest, i.e., the acceleration due to the force applied by you is small. On the other hand, a 
strong push results in the ball starting to move fast, i.e., a larger acceleration due to the force 
applied by you. So based on your experiences, you can make a hypothesis — for the same object, 
a larger force results in larger acceleration (or a smaller force results in smaller acceleration). 
Now, how can you test your hypothesis? You will have to think of an activity where you can apply 
forces of different magnitudes on the same object and the same surface to find the resultant 
acceleration. How can you apply forces of different magnitudes? You have learnt in 
earlier grade about gravitational force with which the Earth pulls an object towards 
itself. It is called the weight of an object and is different for different objects. Hence, 
you can use weights of different magnitudes to apply forces of different magnitudes. 
Think as a Scientist
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Activity 6.3: Let us experiment 
(Demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a 
classroom group activity facilitated by the teacher.
1.	 Take four ball bearing wheels, two pencils, 
an empty cardboard box (to make a cart), a 
paper cup, a piece of pipe (to use as a pulley), 
a length of thread, some coins or other 
objects (to place in cup) and a weighing scale 
to measure mass.
2.	 Insert two pencils through the sides of the box 
near the bottom, to function as axles and attach 
a wheel to each of their free ends as shown in 
Fig. 6.17a (if the wheels are loose, wrap some 
adhesive tape at the pencil ends to fit the wheels 
tightly). Attach a thread to the front end of the 
box with which you can pull the cart.
3.	 Draw a line at one end of the table, which will mark the starting point 
for the cart. Put the thread over a small pipe attached at the other end 
of the table (Fig. 6.17b). To this thread attach a cup in which you can 
put some objects. As you let the system go, the cup will move down due 
to the gravitational force by the Earth on it, and the thread will pull the 
cart with a constant force. 
4.	 Measure the mass of the cup along with any other objects put inside it 
with the weighing scale.
5.	 Start recording a video of the cart in slow motion. Release the cart from 
the start line, and record the video until it reaches the pipe at the other 
end of the table.
Fig. 6.17: (a) A cart, (b) a cart and 
pulley system
(a)
(b)
Wheels
Cart
Cardboard 
box
Paper 
cup
Paper 
cup
Pencils
Thread
Pulley

How Forces Affect Motion
103
6. Read the time when you released the cart and when it reached the end
of the table by seeing the slow-motion video, and record the difference
as time T1.
7. Now double the mass of the cup with the objects inside it, and repeat
steps 5 and 6 to record the time difference T2.
Using the values of the time measured, let us do some analysis. For both 
cases, the cart starts with zero velocity u = 0 and travels the same distance s. 
If a1 and a2 are the accelerations in the two cases respectively, using 
kinematic equation, we obtain
s
a T
=
2
1
1
1
2
and
2
2
2
1
2
s
a T
=
Equating the two equations, we obtain
a
T
a
T
=
2
1
2
2
2
1
Substituting the values of T1 and T2 , you find that when you increased 
the force for the same mass of the cart, the acceleration increased.
You may conclude that the acceleration of an object of fixed mass 
increases as the net force applied on it increases.
Apart from force, does acceleration depends on any other factor? From everyday experiences, 
you know that with the same magnitude of force, it is easier to set lighter objects in motion 
than heavier ones.  This leads to a second hypothesis, that for the same force, a smaller mass 
has a larger acceleration (or a larger mass has a smaller acceleration). Now how can you test 
your second hypothesis?  
Think as a Scientist
Activity 6.4: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity 
facilitated by the teacher.
1. Repeat Activity 6.3 with a variation. Keep the mass of the cup and objects
inside it constant. Double the mass of the cart by adding more objects in it.
2. Measure the mass of the cart along with the objects inside it with a
weighing scale.
3. Carry out steps 5 and 6 of Activity 6.3.
Using the values of time measured, find the ratio of acceleration for
these two cases. Do you find that for the same force, when you increased 
the mass of the cart, the acceleration decreased? This means that for a given 
magnitude of a force, the acceleration produced is inversely related to the 
mass of the object. 
The relation between force, mass and acceleration is expressed in the 
Newton’s second law, one of the most fundamental ideas in all of science. 
Newton’s second law of motion can be stated as:
When a net force acts on an object, the object accelerates in the direction 
of the net force. The magnitude of the acceleration is proportional to the 
magnitude of the net force and is inversely proportional to the mass of 
the object.

104
Exploration|Grade 9
Mathematically it can be expressed as
	
	
	
           
= F
a
m 	
(6.1)
	
               	
or       F = ma	
(6.2)
where a denotes acceleration, F denotes force, and m denotes mass 
of the object. The direction of acceleration is the same as the direction 
of net force.
You know that the SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s–2 
respectively. If m = 1 kg , a = 1 m s–2, then using Eq. (6.2) we obtain 
F = (1 kg) × (1 m s–2) = 1 kg m s–2 = 1 N
One newton of force is defined as the force that produces an 
acceleration of 1 m s–2 on an object of mass 1 kg.
You know that under the influence of gravitational force, an object 
falls towards the Earth. During this motion, the acceleration involved 
is called the acceleration due to the gravitational force by the Earth 
and is denoted by g . Its unit is the same as that of acceleration, m s–2. 
Using Eq. (6.2), the gravitational force acting on an object of mass m is 
	
	
	
	
 F = mg	
(6.3)
The value of acceleration due to gravitational force by the Earth is 
g = 9.8 m s–2. It can be taken to be nearly constant near the surface of 
the Earth. For quick estimations, one can also take g = 10 m s–2.
Threads of Curiosity
As per Eq. (6.1), in Activity 6.3, doubling the force on the cart should have doubled the acceleration 
you measured. But in reality, you may have found the increase to be little less than a factor of two.
Similarly in Activity 6.4, when you doubled the mass of the cart, the acceleration should have been 
halved but you might have found a slightly different value. Apart from measurement errors, the 
friction between the cart’s wheels and the surface can lead to such differences.
The more complete form of Newton’s second law is expressed in terms of momentum. The 
momentum of an object is defined as the product of its mass and velocity. The direction of the 
momentum is same as that of the velocity. Newton’s second law states that the rate of change of 
momentum of an object is proportional to the net force and takes place in the direction in which 
the net force acts. Newton’s second law expressed in this form is applicable to situations even 
where the mass of the object is not constant.
Ready to Go Beyond
Newton’s second law of motion is considered to be a fundamental 
law of nature. Many events around us can be explained on the basis of 
Newton’s second law of motion. 
In a game of cricket, you might have noticed that while catching 
a fast-moving ball, the fielder gradually pulls their hands backwards 
with the moving ball just after catching it (Fig. 6.18). In doing so, the 
time duration is increased during which the high velocity of the ball 
reduces to zero. This reduces the magnitude of the acceleration of the 
Fig. 6.18: Catching a 
cricket ball 
How much does a 
force of 1 N feel? If 
you hold a 100 g mass 
in your palm, the 
upward force your 
palm applies on the 
mass is around 1 N. 
Threads of 
Curiosity
The acceleration due 
to gravitational force 
by the Earth ( g ) does 
not depend on the 
mass of the object.
Note

How Forces Affect Motion
105
ball as it slows down, thus requiring a smaller force to be applied by the 
fielder to stop the ball. Applying a smaller force to the moving ball also 
minimises injury to the fielder.
For a similar reason, airbags are provided in vehicles
(Fig. 6.19). In the event of a collision and the vehicle 
coming to an abrupt halt, the airbag inflates quickly into 
a soft compressible cushion. Instead of directly hitting 
the hard steering wheel or dashboard, the passenger’s 
head and chest push into the bag, and the time over 
which the hitting occurs increases. Smaller acceleration 
means a reduced force exerted on the person, thereby 
lowering the risk of serious injuries, particularly when 
combined with the seat belt usage.
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 6.19: Inflated airbag in 
a vehicle
Fig. 6.20: Cracking a 
coconut in one go
Have you ever attempted cracking a fresh coconut in one 
go? It is brought down at a very high velocity to hit a hard 
surface (Fig. 6.20). When the coconut hits the ground, it stops in 
a very short time. To change its velocity so quickly, the ground 
must exert a very large force on it. This large force breaks the 
shell.
Example 6.4: A weight lifter is holding a barbell with mass of 10 kg fixed on 
each side of the bar (Fig. 6.8). The mass of the bar itself is 10 kg. How much 
force is she applying to keep the barbell steady?
Answer: The total mass of the barbell is 30 kg. The gravitational force due to 
the Earth, acting on the barbell in the downward direction is (using Eq. 6.3),
F  = mg = 30 kg × 9.8 m s–2 = 294 N
To keep the barbell steady, the weightlifter has to apply an equal force 
in the opposite direction. So, she is applying 294 N in the upward direction.
Example 6.5: A student is trying to push a stationary block of 25 kg on a 
horizontal floor. The maximum force of friction opposing this motion is 
50 N. Determine the displacement of the block in 2 seconds if Rahul pushes 
it with a constant force of (i) 50 N and (ii) 55 N in the forward direction.
Answer:
	(i)	 The force applied by the student is equal to the opposing force of 
friction. Thus, the two forces are balanced and the net force acting on 
the block is zero. So, the block will remain stationary.
	(ii)	 The net force on the block is 55 N – 50 N = 5 N.
The mass of the block is 25 kg. Using the Newton’s second law of 
motion, the acceleration of the block is 
−
−
=
=
=
=
2
2
5 N
5 kg m s
0.2 m s
25 kg
25 kg
F
a
m
Using the kinematic equation, the displacement of the block in 
2 seconds is 
(
)
−
−




=
+
=
×
+
×
×
=






2
2
1
2
1
1
0 m s
2 s
0 2 m s
2 s
0 4 m
2
2
.
.
s
ut
at
 
in the forward direction.

106
Exploration|Grade 9
Example 6.6: A sports car of mass 
1500 kg is moving towards the east 
and its velocity-time graph is shown in 
Fig. 6.21. Calculate the force acting on the 
car during
	 (i)	 0 s to 5 s
	(ii)	 5 s to 10 s
	(iii)	 10 s to 15 s 
Answer:
(i)  During 0 s to 5 s:
As the velocity-time graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis, it indicates 
that the sports car is moving with a constant acceleration during this time 
interval with u = 0 m s–1, v = 10 m s–1 and t = 5 s.
Using the kinematic equation v = u + at, we can find the acceleration, 
10 m s–1 = 0 m s–1 + (a × 5 s)
a = 2 m s–2
Now, using the Newton’s second law of the motion F = ma, we can find 
the force acting on the sports car as,
F = 1500 kg × 2 m s–2 = 3000 N acting towards the east.
(ii)  During 5 s to 10 s: 
As the velocity-time graph is a straight line parallel to the time axis, it 
indicates that the sports car is moving with a constant velocity. Hence, no 
force is acting on the sports car.
	(iii)	 During 10 s to 15 s: 
As the velocity-time graph is a straight line inclined to the time axis, it 
indicates that the sports car is moving with a constant acceleration in this 
time interval with u = 10 m s–1, v = 0 m s–1 and t = 5 s. Using the kinematic 
equation v = u + at , we can find the acceleration, 
0 m s–1 = 10 m s–1 + (a × 5 s)
a = – 2 m s–2
Now, using the Newton’s second law of the motion F = ma , we can find 
the force acting on the sports car as,
F = 1500 kg × (– 2 m s–2) = – 3000 N
The negative sign shows that the force is acting in a direction opposite 
to the direction of motion, that is towards the west. 
6.	 A toy car of mass 100 g is moving with a constant velocity of 0.5 m s–1. 
What is the net force acting on the toy car?
7.	 Two children of different masses are sitting on identical swings. To 
impart identical initial acceleration, for which child would you require 
to apply a larger force? Explain why. 
8.	 How are glass items packed for transportation using a bubble wrap or 
hay protected from damage?
Pause and Ponder
Time (s)
0
5.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
10.0
15.0
Fig. 6.21: Velocity-time graph for a 
sports car
Velocity (m s–1)

How Forces Affect Motion
107
6.6 Newton’s Third Law of Motion
We have described the behaviour of an object when a net 
force acts on it. But do you remember learning earlier that at 
least two objects must interact for a force to come into play? 
Haven’t you experienced that when you push a ball with your 
foot, you feel a force applied by the ball on your foot (Fig. 6.22)? It is 
then natural to ask how both the objects are affected in this process. 
Newton’s third law addresses this issue.
Activity 6.5: Let us explore
1.	 Locate a chair with wheels and a large heavy table.
2.	 Sit on the chair with your legs raised above the floor. Now, using 
both your hands, push the table away from you, i.e., apply a 
force on the table in the forward direction as shown in Fig. 6.23a. 
What happens to you? Does the chair you are sitting upon move 
in the opposite direction?
3.	 Now, try to pull the table towards you, i.e., apply a force on the 
table in the direction opposite to that in step 2 (Fig. 6.23b). In 
which direction does your chair move now?
What conclusion can you draw from this activity? Each time, when 
you applied a force on the table, the table applied a force upon you 
in the opposite direction. You may have experienced this in various 
other situations.
If you are sitting on a bicycle and you want to move forward 
without pedalling, what do you do (Fig. 6.24)? You push the ground 
in the backward direction with your feet causing both you and the 
bicycle to move forward. This is because your feet apply a force on 
the ground and the ground applies a force on your feet in the opposite 
direction. This causes you to move forward along with the bicycle. 
In fact, this is how you walk or run. Notice what you do while 
walking or running. You push the ground backwards with your feet 
(Fig. 6.25). The ground applies an opposite force on your feet to make 
you move forward. The force applied by the ground is in the form 
of friction. Thus, in this case friction helps you move rather than 
oppose you.
Bridging Science and Society
While walking or running when you push the ground backwards 
with your foot, i.e., when your foot tries to slide backwards, the force 
of friction acts in the forward direction. Had there been no force of 
friction, your foot would have slipped backwards while attempting to 
push the ground and you would have fallen down. Grooves are made 
on the soles of footwear to increase the force of friction between the 
floor and soles. Similarly, treads on tyres of vehicles help increase 
the force of friction between the tyres and the road. You can now 
understand, why it is difficult to walk on wet polished floors or ice, or 
why it is risky to drive on roads covered with water or snow.
Fig. 6.22: Kicking a ball
Fig. 6.23: Applying force on a 
table in the (a) forward direction, 
(b) reverse direction
(b)
Force applied 
by the girl on 
the table
Force applied 
by the table on 
the girl
Force applied 
by the girl on 
the table
Force applied 
by the table on 
the girl
(a)
Fig. 6.24: Pushing the ground 
backwards
Ground pushing the 
rider along with the 
bicycle forward
Feet pushing 
the ground 
backwards
Fig. 6.25: Walking
Foot 
pushing 
the ground 
backwards
Force of 
friction 
pushing 
the person 
forward
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5

108
Exploration|Grade 9
It was found experimentally that the magnitudes of such two forces 
are equal. Can you also observe this in some other way? You know how to 
measure the magnitude of the force using a spring balance.
Activity 6.6: Let us verify
1.	 Take two identical spring balances.
2.	 Place them in horizontal position on a table and connect them by 
their hooks as shown in Fig. 6.26. Fix the free end of one of the spring 
balances to an immovable object or hold it fixed by your hand.
3.	 Imagine that you are pulling the free end of the other spring balance 
with your other hand. Predict what will be the readings of their scales 
if the spring balances are stationary.
4.	 Now, carry out step 3. Repeat it multiple times by varying the 
magnitude of the force applied by you. Is your observation same as 
your prediction?
Fig. 6.26: Two spring balances connected together are pulled in opposite directions
The readings of the scales of two spring balances are the same every 
time. What does it indicate? 
It indicates that the forces applied by them on each other in the opposite 
direction are equal in magnitude.
All these observations are summed up in the Newton’s third law of 
motion, which can be stated as:
Whenever one object is exerting a force on a second object, 
the second object is simultaneously exerting an equal and 
opposite force on the first object.
The forces always occur in pairs but remember that these two 
forces act on two different objects.
Note
Many daily life observations can be understood on the 
basis of the Newton’s third law of motion. You might have seen 
a person climbing a coconut tree or palm tree (Fig. 6.27). The 
legs of the person climbing the vertically erect tree push down 
against the trunk. The friction between the trunk and the legs 
of the person pushes the person upwards by an equal force. 
Thus, it is harder to climb up the smooth tree trunks that have 
lesser friction.
Have you ever noticed how a boat or a canoe moves forward 
(Fig. 6.28)? When the canoeist pushes the water backwards 
with their paddle, the water pushes the paddle forward with 
an equal force. The two forces are equal in magnitude but act 
on different objects, the paddle and the water, so they do not 
cancel each other. The force on the paddle makes the paddle 
and the canoe move forward. When the canoeist pushes harder 
on the water, the forward force on the paddle is larger, and the 
canoe’s velocity increases.
Fig. 6.28: Rowing a canoe
Paddle pushing 
water backwards
Water pushing the 
paddle and canoe 
forward
Fig. 6.27: A person climbing a 
coconut tree
Person 
pushing the 
trunk down
Force of 
friction 
pushing a 
person up

How Forces Affect Motion
109
Threads of Curiosity
Apart from how hard one paddles, there are several other factors (drag, 
water currents, mass of the canoe, style of rowing, etc.) which impact the 
speed of a canoe. 
On television, you might have watched the rocket launches our country 
has done over the years. The launch of a rocket can also be explained on the 
basis of the Newton’s third law of motion. To understand that, let us first do 
a fun activity.
Activity 6.7: Let us understand
1.	 Collect a large balloon, a piece of drinking straw, adhesive tape, a long 
thread, and two nails or hooks on two walls.
2.	 Inflate the balloon and tie its neck with a small piece of thread.
3.	 Stick the piece of straw with an adhesive tape on the surface of the 
balloon such that, one end of the straw points towards the neck of the 
balloon, as shown in Fig. 6.29.
4.	 Pass the thread through the straw and tie its two ends to the nails, 
keeping the thread taut (Fig. 6.29).
5.	 Remove the thread tied to the neck of the balloon and observe in which 
direction the straw and the balloon move.
Fig. 6.29: Air rushing out of the balloon
Straw
Air
Balloon
The stretched material of the balloon applies a force on the air molecules 
inside to expel them as it shrinks in size. The air rushing out exerts an equal 
force on the balloon material in the opposite direction. This force causes 
the balloon to start moving in a direction opposite to the direction in which 
the air is rushing out.
A rocket moves in a similar manner (Fig. 6.30). Its engine produces gas 
and expels it in the downward direction, which in turn exerts an equal 
and opposite force on the rocket in the upward direction. This force on the 
rocket in the upward direction is larger than the weight of the rocket, so the 
net force is in the upward direction and the rocket lifts off.
What will happen if the engine of a rocket moving in the space, fires in the 
direction of its motion? The exhaust gases will exert a force in the direction 
opposite to the direction of motion of the rocket, thereby slowing it down. This 
process was used by the Vikram lander of Chandrayaan-3 to slow down and 
attain the necessary velocity for a soft landing near the south pole of the Moon.
The pair of equal and opposite forces (as per the Newton’s third law of 
motion) acts on two different objects, thus, they do not balance each other. On 
the other hand, if two equal and opposite forces act on the same object, they 
balance each other.
Note
Exhaust gas 
pushing the 
rocket up
Rocket engine 
expelling gas 
downwards
Fig. 6.30: Rocket 
launching

110
Exploration|Grade 9
Fig. 6.33: The Earth and the 
fruit applying equal and 
opposite gravitational forces 
on each other
Force on 
the fruit by 
the Earth
Force on 
the Earth 
by the fruit
	 9.	 Why does a fireperson sometimes struggle when holding the pipe 
issuing water? 
	10.	 Suppose a spacecraft is moving in a region of space where the 
gravitational force acting upon it is negligible. Suggest how can it 
change its velocity. 
Pause and Ponder
You have learnt about contact and non-contact forces earlier. Is 
Newton’s third law applicable only for contact forces? Newton’s third 
law applies to all types of forces, contact or non-contact, that we come 
across in everyday mechanical situations (Figs. 6.31, 6.32, 6.33).
Fig. 6.31: Two bar magnets applying equal and 
opposite magnetic forces on each other
Fig. 6.32: Two similarly charged 
balloons applying equal and opposite 
electrostatic forces on each other
Example 6.7: As shown in Fig. 6.33, the Earth and the fruit apply equal 
and opposite gravitational forces on each other. Then why does the 
fruit move towards the Earth while the Earth doesn’t seem to move 
towards the fruit?
Answer: Though the forces acting on both the Earth and the fruit are 
equal in magnitude; the mass of the Earth is so large (as compared 
to the fruit) that the acceleration of the Earth caused by the force is 
extremely small as per 
F
a
m


=




. Thus, its effect on the Earth is too 
small to be noticed. 
Example 6.8: When a 0.1 kg bullet is fired from a 5 kg gun with a force 
of 2 N, the gun recoils. What are the magnitudes of initial accelerations 
of the bullet and the gun?
Answer: From the Newton’s third law of motion, the recoil force on 
the gun is also 2 N.
From the Newton’s second law of motion, the initial magnitudes of 
acceleration of gun
2
2 N
force
0.4 m s
mass of gun
5 kg
−
=
=
=
While the initial acceleration of bullet
2
2 N
force
20 m s
mass of bullet
0.1 kg
−
=
=
=
Even though the pair of forces are equal in magnitude, the 
magnitudes of accelerations are not equal because their masses are 
different.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 5
Note
Even though the 
forces acting on 
the two interacting 
objects are 
always equal in 
magnitude, they 
do not, in general, 
produce equal 
acceleration. 
This is because 
the masses of the 
objects upon which 
they are acting 
may be different.

How Forces Affect Motion
111
6.7 Forces Acting on a System of Objects
Until now, you studied the three laws of Newton as applied to a single 
object. These laws allowed you to predict the position and velocities of the 
object as forces act on it. But can we apply these laws to two or more objects 
connected together?  
Consider two boxes of masses m1 and m2 placed on a frictionless 
horizontal surface and connected by a string (Fig. 6.34). A force F pulls 
Box 1 to the right. Box 1 applies a force on Box 2 via the string. By Newton’s 
third law, Box 2 applies an equal and opposite force via the string on Box 1. 
We call this force tension T. On Box 1, the force F acts to the right, while 
the tension force T acts to the left. On Box 2, the tension force T acts on the 
right. How can we find the acceleration of each box?
Fig. 6.34: A system of two boxes attached together by a string
Box 2
T
F
Box 1
One approach is to calculate the net force on each box separately and 
then use Newton’s second law to find acceleration. A simpler way is to 
consider the two boxes and the string as a single system. In this approach, 
the forces within the system (internal forces) need not be considered 
and only forces that act from the outside (external forces) matter. In our 
case, the tension T  acting on both the boxes is the internal force, while the 
force F  is the external force. Thus, using Newton’s second law (Eq. 6.1) the 
acceleration of the system is 
	
 	
     
(
)
1
2
mass of the system
=
=
+
F
F
a
m
m

(6.4)
The system of two boxes accelerates just like a single object of mass m1 + m2.
If you had analysed the motion of the two boxes individually as you will 
learn to do in higher grades, the result would have been the same. Treating 
connected objects as a system often simplifies the analysis. This highlights 
the power of Newton’s laws in studying even complicated systems of objects.
In addition to F, the external forces will be gravitational 
force (m1 g + m2 g ) acting on the system downwards, which is 
balanced by the normal force (N1 + N2 ) acting on the system 
from the ground (Fig. 6.35).
Fig. 6.35: External forces on a system of two 
boxes attached together by a string
Box 2
N1 + N2
(m1 + m2) g
Box 1
F
Ready to Go Beyond
While walking, your 
arms and legs move 
in a complex manner. 
Yet your overall 
motion can be studied 
by treating your body 
as a single object. 
Science often becomes 
simpler when we stop 
looking at parts and 
start looking at the 
whole.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Next
Level
Up

112
Exploration|Grade 9
At a Glance 
	y The force of friction acts on an object in the direction opposite to its 
direction of motion. 
	y Newton’s first law of motion: An object at rest remains at rest, and an 
object in motion continues to move with a constant velocity, unless a 
net force acts upon the object.
	y Newton’s second law of motion: When a net force acts on an object, 
the object accelerates in the direction of the net force. The magnitude 
of the acceleration is proportional to the magnitude of the net force 
and is inversely proportional to the mass of the object.
	y Newton’s third law of motion: Whenever one object is exerting a 
force on a second object, the second object is simultaneously exerting 
an equal and opposite force on the first object.
1.	 Using a horizontal force F, a table is moved across the floor at a 
constant velocity. How much is the frictional force exerted by the 
floor on the table?
2.	 For a ball moving on a smooth frictionless surface, choose the 
appropriate option that will make the following statements 
physically correct.
(i)	 If no net force is applied on the ball, the velocity of the ball will 
remain the same/increase/decrease.
(ii)	 If a net force is applied on the ball in the direction of its motion, 
the magnitude of the velocity of the ball will remain the same/
increase/decrease.
(iii)	 If a net force is applied on the ball in a direction opposite to the 
direction of its motion, the magnitude of the velocity of the ball 
will remain the same/increase/decrease.
3.	 Two blocks P and Q on a smooth horizontal surface are shown in 
Fig. 6.36a and Fig. 6.36b. Two forces of magnitudes 4 N and 5 N are 
acting in opposite directions on block P, while block Q is moving 
with a constant velocity.
Fig. 6.36
Q
5 N
4 N
P
(a)
(b)
Which of the following statement is correct?
(i)	 P experiences a net force and Q does not experience a net force.
(ii)	 P does not experience a net force and Q experiences a net force.
(iii)	 Both P and Q experience a net force.
(iv)	 Neither P nor Q experiences a net force.
Revise, Reflect, Refine

How Forces Affect Motion
113
4.	 While practising for the snake boat race (Vallum kalli in Kerala), 
100 oarsmen are rowing a boat together. Out of these, 95 row 
backwards to propel the boat forward. But by mistake, 5 oarsmen row 
in the opposite direction. If each oarsman applies a horizontal force of 
200 N, what is the net force on the snake boat? (Ignore drag forces, air 
friction, etc.)
5.	 When a net force acts on an object, we observe that the object 
accelerates: 
(i)	 opposite to the direction of force, with acceleration proportional 
to the force acting on the object.
(ii)	 opposite to the direction of force, with acceleration proportional 
to the mass of the object.
(iii)	 in the direction of force, with acceleration inversely proportional 
to the force acting on the object.
(iv)	 in the direction of force, with acceleration proportional to the 
force acting on the object.
6.	 The position-time graph for four objects A, B, C and D moving along a 
straight line are given in Fig. 6.37. A net force acts on:
(i)	 Object A
(ii)	 Object B
(iii)	 Object C
(iv)	 Object D
Position
Time
0
Time
0
Position
Time
0
Position
Time
0
Position
Fig. 6.37
Object A
Object B
Object C
Object D
7.	 A sailor jumps out from a small boat to the shore (Fig. 6.38). As the 
sailor jumps forward, will the boat move? If yes, in which direction 
and why.
Fig. 6.38: A sailor jumping forward
Fig. 6.39: A landing mat for a high jump event
8.	 During a high jump event, a landing mat or sand bed is placed for the 
athlete to fall upon (Fig. 6.39). Explain the reason behind it.

114
Exploration|Grade 9
9.	 A hand cart loaded with vegetables collides with an identical but empty 
hand cart. During the collision:
(i)	 the loaded cart exerts a force of larger magnitude on the empty cart.
(ii)	 the empty cart exerts a force of larger magnitude on the loaded cart.
(iii)	 neither cart exerts a force on the other.
(iv)	 the loaded cart and the empty cart, both exert an equal magnitude 
of force on each other.
10.	 The acceleration-mass graph for the acceleration produced by a force 
on objects of different masses is plotted in Fig. 6.40. Plot the force-mass 
graph for this case.
Velocity (m s–1)
Time (s)
0
4
10
20
30
8
Fig. 6.41
Mass (kg)
0
2
1
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
3
4
5
Fig. 6.40
Acceleration (m s–2)
11.	 The velocity-time graph of an object of mass 10 kg moving along a 
straight line is shown in Fig. 6.41. Calculate the force acting on the 
object by using the graph.
12.	 A bullet of mass 50 g moving with a speed of 100 m s–1 enters a heavy 
stationary wooden block and stops after penetrating a distance of 
50 cm. Estimate the stopping force acting on the bullet (assume that 
the bullet undergoes constant acceleration within the block).
13.	 An ace footballer converted a penalty shot by kicking the football 
with a speed of 108 km h–1. The estimated force they imparted was 
800 N. The mass of the football was 0.4 kg. Calculate the time of contact 
between their foot and the ball.
14.	 An object of mass 2 kg moving with a constant velocity of 10 m s–1 
encounters a rough patch where the force of friction on the object is 
7 N. At the same time, an additional constant force of 3 N opposing the 
motion is applied on the object. After entering the rough patch, how 
much distance does the object travel before coming to rest?
15.	 A tractor pulls a harrow (a ploughing tool) of mass m1 with a net force F 
resulting in an acceleration of a1. The same tractor pulls a trolley of 
mass m2 with a force F producing an acceleration of a2. If the tractor 
now pulls the trolley with the harrow placed on it (with the same 
force F ), then obtain an expression for the resulting acceleration in 
terms of a1 and a2. Ignore friction.
16.	 When the pole of a bar magnet is brought close to a magnetic compass, 
the bar magnet and the compass needle (which is also a magnet) exert 
a magnetic force on each other. As per Newton’s third law of motion, 
both the forces are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. 
However, the compass needle moves, whereas the bar magnet does 
not move (Fig. 6.42). Explain why.
Fig. 6.42: A bar magnet 
and a magnetic 
compass

How Forces Affect Motion
115
In the real world, friction is always present whenever surfaces are in contact. 
Scientists have been trying to find ways to reduce friction between surfaces 
by using lubricants, coatings or texturing of surfaces, streamlining shapes of 
objects, and by using magnetic levitation. 
The Quest Continues…
	y You know that the force of friction depends on the nature of the 
surfaces in contact. Does it also depend on how hard the surfaces 
press each other? Is the friction acting on an object that is about to 
move larger than the friction after motion begins? Is the friction 
which acts on a rolling object less than that on a sliding object? 
Find answers to these questions and create an infographic. Such 
observations help explain why the invention of the wheel was a 
major milestone in human history. 
	y Take two toy cars of equal mass and stick a bar magnet on top of 
each (Fig. 6.32). Fix a metre scale on a smooth surface. Place the cars 
near the midpoint of the metre scale with the like poles touching. 
Release the cars and record the time taken (using two stopwatches), 
and distance travelled by each before coming to a rest. Repeat 
the experiment after adding equal masses to both cars. Did the 
cars travel equal distances in opposite directions? Plot a graph of 
distance travelled versus mass. Analyse and discuss your findings.
	y Wrap a rope once around a rough tree branch or post. Attach 
a heavy bucket to one end and try to hold it by the other end 
(Fig. 6.43). Now, add one more turn of the rope and repeat. You will 
find that each extra turn increases the ‘grip’ between the rope and 
the branch, increasing the friction and reducing the force required, 
making it much easier to hold the same load. The reduction in 
effort is much larger than you might expect from just adding one 
turn. This shows that friction does not increase in a simple linear 
way, small changes in contact can lead to large changes in force. In 
the same way, friction between a rope and a post allows large ships 
to be held safely at a pier. 
	y It is often instructive to examine how scientific ideas develop over 
time. If you are interested, explore how Newton formulated the 
laws of motion by reading excerpts from his original work, the 
Principia. Both the original text and commentaries are available 
online.
Newton’s laws describe motion across an enormous range of scales, from 
everyday objects to planets and stars. They need modification only very 
close to massive objects, at extremely high speeds near the speed of light, 
and very small (atomic) scales.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 6.43
The Journey Beyond
