Reproduction: How 
Life Continues
You have learnt that one of the important characteristics of 
living beings is that they reproduce. Every organism has a 
definite life span — it is born, grows, matures, reproduces 
and eventually dies. Reproduction is a biological process by which 
living beings produce new individuals of their own kind. This is how 
life on the Earth continues to exist. For example, a mango tree may 
grow old and die, but its seeds continue to grow as new mango plants. 
Similarly, cows give birth to calves, dogs to puppies, cats to kittens 
and humans to children.
You have also learnt that living beings reproduce in two main 
ways — asexually, where a single parent produces offspring 
that are almost exact copies of the parent and sexually, where 
offspring inherit a mix of characteristics from the two individuals. 
This mixing of characteristics may lead to the small differences 
between parents and their young ones. Accumulated over many 
generations, such differences help living beings adapt to changing 
environments, and sometimes even give rise to new kinds of 
Think It Over
	y
When does a 
farmer prefer 
asexual or sexual 
methods of 
reproduction for 
crops production?
	y
Why do you 
think most 
complex animals 
and flowering 
plants use sexual 
reproduction, 
while many simple 
organisms, like 
yeast and hydra 
mainly reproduce 
asexually?
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 13
Chapter 
11

209
Reproduction: How Life Continues
Fig. 11.1: Bryophyllum 
leaf sprouts tiny 
plantlet 
species. In this chapter, we will explore how reproduction takes place in 
different organisms, including humans.
11.1 Asexual Reproduction
Asexual mode of reproduction is seen in many unicellular organisms 
like bacteria, amoeba, yeast and simple multicellular organisms (hydra, 
sponge). It is also seen in many plants. Recall the examples you studied 
in earlier grades.
Many types of plants sprout new shoots and roots from their existing 
parts. For example, plants with fleshy underground stems, such as potato 
and ginger, sprout new plants without producing seeds. Money plant 
stem, sugarcane stem cuttings grow into a new plant, Bryophyllum (Fig. 
11.1) leaves sprout tiny plantlets which eventually grow into new plants. 
All these are examples of vegetative propagation, which means that new 
plants arise from the vegetative parts, i.e., from growing parts of a plant. 
The key point about this type of reproduction is that it involves only one 
parent and hence, produces genetically identical individuals.
11.1.1 How is vegetative propagation in plants helpful in 
agriculture?
Asexual reproduction produces genetically identical individuals. This 
natural process has been adapted by scientists and horticulturists to 
develop several methods of vegetative propagation, such as cutting, 
grafting, layering and tissue culture for growing plants. These methods 
are widely used to efficiently propagate plants, and have significantly 
improved agricultural and horticultural practices. Such methods enable 
farmers to cultivate desirable crops on a large scale.
Activity 11.1: Let us explore
1.	 Interact with gardeners working in your school garden or farmers 
working in a field.
2.	 Observe the techniques of cutting, grafting and layering followed 
by them. Discuss these techniques with them and record your 
observations in your notebook.
Cutting
1.	 Note the following points while observing the technique of cutting in 
the field.
(i)	 Does the gardener, scientist or horticulturist cut the overgrown 
branches of a plant at the end of its growing season? (Different 
plants have different growing seasons).
(ii)	 Observe them prepare the cuttings from a plant for the purpose of 
growing new plants. Note the average length of the cuttings.
(iii)	 Count the number of nodes and internodes on the cuttings.
2.	 Collect the cuttings of the shoots in the morning for planting.
3.	 Remove leaves from the lower half of each cutting.
4.	 Insert the cuttings up to approximately half of their length in the soil mixed 
with compost at an angle of about 45– 60° from the soil surface (Fig. 11.2).
5.	 Water them regularly and observe the change, if any. 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 13
Fig. 11.2: Cutting

Exploration|Grade 9
210
Grafting
1.	 For grafting, take a healthy rooted 
plant (Plant A) (Fig. 11.3a) (for 
example, a wild rose variety) and 
a healthy stem piece from another 
plant (Plant B) of other varieties 
(for example, a yellow rose 
plant and/or a pink rose plant) 
(Fig. 11.3c and Fig. 11.3d). 
2.	 Create a wound or a slit on a twig 
of Plant A (Fig. 11.3b).
3.	 Insert and fit the cutting of stem 
of Plant B into the slit of stem of 
Plant A (Fig. 11.3e).
4.	 Protect the wound or slit by using 
a cotton cloth or by wrapping 
film to avoid pests entering the 
graft until it heals (Fig. 11.3f). Cut 
the other branches of Plant A.
5.	 Water the plant regularly and 
observe the growth of Plant B 
along with Plant A.
Layering
1.	 For layering, select a flexible, thin twig of a tree or a shrub, 
such as a lemon and bury the middle part of the twig under 
the soil surface (Fig. 11.4).
2.	 Water it regularly and observe the growth of new leaves on 
the twig buried in the soil.
3.	 After 10 – 15 days, the roots will develop from the area of the 
twig buried in the soil.
4.	 Once roots have developed, cut the twig from the parent 
plant, so that it can grow as a new plant.
These are some of the methods of asexual reproduction 
through which different varieties of plants can be propagated.
Bridging Science and Society
Propagation of plants by the tissue culture 
technique has revolutionised farming practices 
like in banana farming. Farmers are now 
provided mass-produced healthy plantlets from 
the shoot tip (apical meristem) of several plants, 
which help eliminate virus-infected plants and 
ensures high yields. This is also an example of 
asexual reproduction in plants.
Fig. 11.5: Plant tissue culture
Various Krishi Vigyan 
Kendras (KVKs) under 
the Indian Council of 
Agricultural Research 
(ICAR) allow farmers 
to gain vocational 
skills in modern 
grafting that help them 
grow high-yield fruits, 
and boost their income 
by learning various 
marketing strategies 
and government 
programmes.
Bridging Science 
and Society
You have learnt about various methods of vegetative propagation in 
plants. Let us examine asexual reproduction in other organisms.
Fig. 11.4: Layering
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Fig. 11.3: Steps of grafting
Plant A
Plant B
Graft
Slit

211
Reproduction: How Life Continues
Activity 11.2: Let us explore
1.	 Take 20 mL of sugar solution (1 g in 10 mL) in a test tube.
2.	 Add a pinch of yeast granules to it and then place a cotton plug on the 
mouth of the test tube.
3.	 Keep it undisturbed in a warm place to allow the yeast to become active.
4.	 After 1 – 2 hours, place a small drop of the yeast mixture from the test 
tube onto a glass slide and mount it with a coverslip.
5.	 Observe the slide under a compound microscope at different 
magnifications and draw a diagram of what you observe.
Do you observe any small, round outgrowths (buds) emerging from the 
parent yeast cells as shown in Fig. 11.6? Do these features indicate that the 
yeast is duplicating? How do these observations help you in understanding 
reproduction in yeast?
In organisms, such as hydra (a multicellular animal), repeated cell 
division at a specific site on the parent body produces a small outgrowth 
called a bud (Fig. 11.7). The bud enlarges and separates from the parent 
to live independently. This process is called budding. In hydra, one can 
often see many buds growing on the parent’s body at the same time. 
Are there other methods of asexual reproduction in organisms? You 
have learnt that food like fruits get rotten by microbes (fungi). Where else 
do we find these microorganisms? You may have noticed that, if you leave 
cooked food on the kitchen counter for a day in warm weather, it starts to 
smell and may even grow fuzzy patches. Black patches are often seen on 
a damp wall. These are microorganisms. Where do these microorganisms 
come from? For long, people thought living things arose spontaneously 
from non-living matter. Experiments by Louis Pasteur proved that new life 
always comes from pre-existing life. He found the germ theory of disease, 
strengthened the cell theory (all cells arise from pre-existing cells), and led 
to practices like food and instrument sterilisation. We can explore how these 
microogranisms reproduce more closely by performing a simple activity 
that you can conduct at home or in school.
Activity 11.3: Let us experiment
1.	 Take a small slice of bread or a roti and lightly moisten it with a few 
drops of water. 
2.	 Prepare a moist chamber using a plastic box or steel dabba. Place a 
thin layer of cotton in it, cover it with tissue paper and moisten it with 
pre-boiled water. Put the slice of bread or roti on the wet cotton bed 
covered with tissue paper.
3.	 Keep the moist chamber in a warm and dark place, away from direct 
sunlight (if the bread or roti starts drying, add a few drops of water to 
keep it moist).
4.	 Observe the bread or roti every day for any changes. Record your 
observations without touching it directly.
5.	 After three days, observe the surface of the bread or roti carefully 
using a magnifying glass. Do you notice the growth of mould?
6.	 When enough mould grows and spreads on it, carefully take the box to 
the school laboratory. 
Fig. 11.6: Yeast with 
outgrowths
Fig. 11.7: Budding in 
hydra

Exploration|Grade 9
212
We kept the moist 
chamber warm (25 – 35 °C) 
because spores of mould 
present in the air need 
warmth and moisture to 
grow on bread or roti. 
Lower temperatures 
slow or stop their 
reproduction. This is why, 
we refrigerate perishable 
food. Before refrigerators 
became common about 
100 years ago, fresh 
food lasted only 1 – 2 
days. Refrigeration 
(including deep freezing) 
revolutionised food 
habits, enabling year-
round availability of 
fruits, vegetables, and 
dairy products, while 
preventing their spoilage 
from moulds and 
bacteria.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Do you observe thread-like structures with a round 
sac at the tip? Do you also see tiny round structure 
(spores) inside the sac? Where did the mould on your 
bread slice come from? It was not present when the bread was 
fresh. You may have observed fungi growing on rotten fruits 
or while preparing manure. In these cases, fungi grew due to 
spores present in the air. Similarly, in the case of bread, the 
mould grew from the spores already present in the air, which 
settled on the moist bread and began reproducing rapidly. 
Spores are formed in a sac-like structure (Fig. 11.8a) or on a 
swollen vesicle on a long strip of fungal hyphae (Fig. 11.8b).
Spores are produced in huge numbers (millions from one 
mould colony). Spores are lightweight, usually single-celled 
and float easily through air currents, waiting for moisture and 
nutrients to germinate quickly into a new individual.
In all the organisms studied so far in this chapter, the 
central process behind asexual reproduction is mitosis, a type 
of cell division that produces two daughter cells, each having 
the same number of chromosomes identical to the parent cell. 
Because of this, the offspring produced are genetically identical 
to the parent and are called clones. This method is fast and 
helps organisms increase their population quickly, especially 
when environmental conditions are favourable.
11.2 Sexual Reproduction
Sexual reproduction involves two parents in the formation of 
a new individual. This means both parents contribute to the 
genetic material of the offspring. However, if each generation 
were to receive the full set of chromosomes from both the 
parents, the chromosome number would double in every 
generation. This biological problem is solved by a special type of 
cell division known as meiosis.  
7.	 With the help of a needle, carefully transfer 
a little mould onto a microscope slide. Under 
the guidance of your teacher, add cotton blue 
stain — a coloured dye to help see it better.
8.	 Observe the mould under the microscope 
and draw its diagram based on your 
observations.
9.	 Compare the diagram you have drawn with 
Fig. 11.8 and share your observations with 
your classmates.
(a) Rhizopus
Sac
Spores
(b) Aspergillus
Fig. 11.8: Fungi
Hyphae
Bridging Science and Society
Moulds on bread may look unpleasant but fungi benefit society greatly. Fungi grow very 
fast by spore formation and degrade organic wastes and pollutants. Fungi also play an 
important role in removal of heavy metals from industrial wastes. Many antibiotics are 
derived from fungi (penicillin and amoxicillin), saving countless lives from bacterial 
infections. Do you know any fungus that can degrade plastic?
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 2

213
Reproduction: How Life Continues
11.2.1 How does meiosis help create variations in sexual 
reproduction?
Each species has a fixed number of chromosomes in their cells. 
Chromosomes are thread-like structures present in the nucleus of a cell and 
they carry genetic information. Humans have 23 pairs of chromosomes, 
that means, each pair consists of one chromosome each from two different 
individuals — with a total of 46 chromosomes. 
Meiosis is a special type of cell division that forms gametes. In meiosis, 
the chromosome number of a parent cell (diploid) is reduced to half 
(haploid) in daughter cells. The resulting haploid cells are used only for 
reproduction and are called gametes. In animals, male gametes are called 
sperm and female gametes are called eggs. You have learnt about them 
already. In plants, the pollen grain contains male gametes and delivers them 
to an ovule which contains the female gametes (eggs). During meiosis, the 
chromosomes of each pair separate so that each gamete receives only one 
chromosome from each pair. This means that every human gamete has 
23 chromosomes, each carrying genetic information for many characters. 
How many combinations of characters can gametes carry?
Activity 11.4: Let us explore
1.	 Take three pairs of beads of different colours (Fig. 11.9), each pair 
representing two contrasting characters on different chromatids of 
different chromosomes, such as:
	y Pair 1 (green): One light green bead and one dark green bead 
representing blonde and black hair colour, respectively on different 
chromatids of chromosome 1.
	y Pair 2 (blue): One light blue bead and one dark blue bead representing 
straight and curly hair, respectively on different chromatids of 
chromosome 2. 
	y Pair 3 (red): One light red bead and one dark red bead representing 
brown and black eye colour, respectively on different chromatids of 
chromosome 3.
2.	 Make a combination from it by randomly picking one bead from each 
pair.
3.	 Write your combination as ‘light green, 
light blue, light red’.
4.	 How many combinations can you make 
with just these three pairs of characters? 
Each time you make a combination 
using beads, you will get either the 
same combination or a different one. 
With just three pairs of characters, eight 
combinations are possible. 
5.	 Imagine how many combinations are 
possible with 23 pairs of chromosomes, 
each carrying genetic information for 
many characters.
This 
random 
mixing 
provides 
many 
combinations, making children genetically different from their parents 
and also from their siblings. Each of us receives a unique combination of 
Fig. 11.9: Understanding the segregation of characters 
during the formation of gamete by meiosis
Blonde and straight hair with brown eyes
Pair 1 (Green)
Pair 2 (Blue)
Pair 3 (Red)
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 13

Exploration|Grade 9
214
chromosomes. This creates variation among individuals, which is important 
for the survival of a species. Variation helps some individuals adapt better to 
changing environments and over time, this process contributes to evolution. 
For example, some people can tolerate low oxygen levels at high altitudes, or 
digest milk in their adulthood. 
11.2.2 Sexual reproduction in flowering plants
Flowering plants, also called angiosperms, are the most diverse group of 
plants on the Earth. Flowers serve as reproductive organs in angiosperms, 
however, non-flowering plants like pines also reproduce sexually. You will 
study them in the next chapter. 
Look at the herbs, shrubs and trees in your surroundings. Their leaves 
perform photosynthesis, their roots absorb water and nutrients from the 
soil, and their stems provide strength to the plant, these are some of the 
functions of a plant. Flowers also enhance the aesthetics of the plants as 
they are coloured and/or fragrant. How are these features of flowers useful 
for reproduction? 
Explore flowers and their buds on some plants. Record your 
observations in your notebook. Do you observe thin, flat, green covering, 
and coloured projections present in both? 
In flower buds, the coloured projections are 
often covered by a green covering. In the bud 
stage, green covering around all the parts 
is the outermost whorl of the flower. This 
structure is called a sepal. Do you think that 
sepals protect flowers in the bud stage, along 
with other parts of the flower when it blooms? 
The coloured projections of flowers are called 
petals (Fig. 11.10). Do all flowers have these 
two parts? What are the other parts of a flower?
Activity 11.5: Let us explore
1.	 Collect different types of flowers from your surroundings.
2.	 Carefully observe each part of the flowers you have collected, starting 
from the outer whorl to the inner one.
3.	 Record the presence of various floral parts in the different flowers 
that you collected in Table 11.1.
Table 11.1: Observation table to study the parts of a flower
S. No.
Flower parts
Presence of floral parts in different 
flowers
Other 
feature(s)
Guess the 
function of 
flower part
A
B
C
D
1.
Sepal
Yes
2.
Petal
Yes
3.
Stamen
No
4.
Pistil
Yes
Fig. 11.10: Longitudinal section of a flower 
showing its different parts
Petal
Pistil
Sepal
Style
Ovary
Anther
Stamen
Filament
Stigma

215
Reproduction: How Life Continues
4.	 Analyse the function of each part of the flower based on visible 
characters.
5.	 Cut a transverse and a longitudinal section of the ovary (swollen base of 
the pistil) and observe it under a dissecting microscope. 
6.	 Record any other feature(s) in Table 11.1.
7.	 Draw a diagram of the structure you observed under the microscope.
A complete flower has four parts — sepals, petals, stamens and pistil. You 
might have noticed that in some flowers both sepals and petals are fused. 
Can you guess the function of the most attractive part of a flower — the 
coloured petals? The stamen is the male part (Fig. 11.10). It consists of a 
filament and an anther, which produces pollen grains containing male 
gametes. The pistil is the female part that has three subparts — stigma, style 
and ovary (Fig. 11.11). The stigma is located at the tip, and may be flat and/
or sticky. The style is a thin long tube which connects the stigma to the 
ovary. The ovary contains ovules and each ovule has an egg cell (female 
gamete). You have learnt that the transfer of pollen from stamen to stigma 
is essential for the formation of fruits. How can you investigate it?
Activity 11.6: Let us investigate
1.	 Identify sweet pea (matar) or garden pea plants in a garden or a 
nearby field.
2.	 Select two juvenile (less developed) flower bud and three freshly 
blossomed flowers on the same pea plant.
3.	 Carefully remove the stamens from one of the two selected flowers 
buds and one of the three selected flowers.
4.	 Take muslin cloth bags and loosely wrap them around the flower bud, 
the flower bud of which stamens are removed, the flower of which 
stamens are removed and a freshly blossomed flower (Fig. 11.12).
5.	 Leave one freshly blossomed flower uncovered (without muslin 
cloth bag).
6.	 Observe them regularly and notice the development of fruits in place 
of the flowers that were not covered with muslin cloth. Allow them to 
grow for a few more days.
7.	 Once the pods are fully developed in the flowers without muslin 
cloth, remove the muslin cloth from all the wrapped flowers and 
observe them.
8.	 Note your observations in Table 11.2.
Table 11.2: Observation table to study pollination in a pea plant
Treatments
Flower bud 
(wrapped 
with muslin 
cloth bag)
Flower bud with 
removed stamens 
(wrapped with 
muslin cloth bag)
Flower with 
removed stamens 
(wrapped with 
muslin cloth bag)
Flower 
(wrapped 
with muslin 
cloth bag)
Flower 
(without 
muslin 
cloth bag)
Fruit formation 
(Yes/No)
In which treatment(s) do you find the flowers are replaced by fruits? 
What can we infer from this activity? You will notice that fruits are formed 
in place of flowers in all treatments except the one in which the stamens 
were removed from the flower bud. We can infer that the transfer of pollen 
Fig. 11.11: Structure of 
a pistil
Ovule
Ovary
Style
Stigma
Fig. 11.12: Experimental  
set-up for pollination
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 12

Exploration|Grade 9
216
grains from the anther to the stigma is necessary for fruit formation. 
The transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma of a flower 
is called pollination.
11.2.3 How does the process of pollination occur in 
flowers?
In the Activity 11.6, we stated that the process of pollination is the 
transfer of pollen to the stigma of a flower. The transfer of pollen 
occurs to the stigma of the same flower or another flower of the same 
plant, is called self-pollination (Fig. 11.13).
If the pollen is transferred from the anther of a flower of one plant 
to the stigma of a flower of another plant of the same type, the 
pollination is called cross-pollination (Fig. 11.13).
The transfer of the pollen grains to the stigma is important for 
the formation of fruits and seeds. Nature has provided plants with 
various strategies for pollination to occur. What do you think will 
happen if pollination does not occur?
11.2.4 Pollination strategies and reproductive success
Pollination depends on external agents called pollinators, such as 
wind, water, insects (bees, butterflies), or birds. Pollination by wind 
is seen in plants like wheat, maize and rice, where pollen grains are 
light and small, produced in large numbers, and the stigma is long 
and feathery to trap them. In aquatic plants, such as Vallisneria and 
Hydrilla, pollination occurs through water, with currents carrying the 
pollen from one flower to another. Many plants, including sunflower, 
hibiscus and marigold are pollinated by insects, such as bees and 
butterflies. Their flowers are often brightly coloured, produce nectar, 
and give off fragrance to attract pollinators. The pollen grains are 
large, sticky or spiny, so they can attach to the insect’s body and the 
stigma is also sticky to receive them. Some flowers like those of the 
coral tree and hibiscus plant, are pollinated by birds, such as Indian 
white-eye and sunbirds. Let us see how fruits and seeds are formed. 
11.2.5 Fertilisation and seed formation
Once the pollen reaches a compatible stigma, a remarkable process 
begins. Pollen grains produce pollen tubes that grow down through 
the style into the ovary. The male gamete moves through this tube 
and arrives at the ovule, where it fuses with the egg cell (Fig. 11.14). 
This fusion of gametes is referred to as fertilisation and it marks 
the beginning of a new life. The fertilised egg is called a zygote, 
which later develops into an embryo. In the meantime, the ovary 
surrounding the ovules enlarges and develops into a fruit, 
while the ovules develop into seeds inside it (Fig. 11.15). 
Seed dispersal takes place by wind or water and animals.
When conditions like water, air and temperature are 
favourable, the seed germinates and grows into a new plant. 
Thus, sexual reproduction not only produces new plants but 
also creates variation, helping plant species survive and adapt 
to their environment.
Fig. 11.13: Self and
Cross-pollination
Self-pollination
Cross-pollination
Stigma
Anther
Ovary
Stigma
Male 
germ cell
Egg cell
Pollen tube
Fig. 11.14: Germination of 
pollen on stigma 
Ovule
Pollen grain
Fig. 11.15: Transformation of an 
ovary to a fruit

217
Reproduction: How Life Continues
What is the approximate success rate of the common strategies — wind 
pollination and insect pollination — with respect to the seed formation?
Activity 11.7: Let us find out
Studies of pollen production and seed formation by two different 
pollination strategies in different flowers show the following approximate 
trends (Table 11.3) —
Table 11.3: Pollen production and seed formation data
Pollination strategy
Approximate pollen 
grains released per flower
Estimated average 
number of seeds formed
Wind-pollinated grasses 
(e.g., maize, wheat)
5,00,000 –10,00,000
50 –200
Insect-pollinated plants 
(e.g., sunflower)
20,000 – 40,000
800 –1,000
1.	 Compare and analyse the two strategies in terms of 
(Table 11.3) —
	y Pollen to seed ratio
	y Efficiency of pollination and seed formation
2.	 Explain why producing a very large number of pollen 
grains can still be an effective pollination strategy.
Pause and Ponder
1.	 In a china-rose (hibiscus or gudhal) plant, 
a pollen tube grows and continues through 
the style after pollen lands on the stigma. 
Which process is about to happen next?
2.	 Look at the pictures (Fig. 11.16) of calotropis 
(madar) seeds and dandelion seeds given 
below. Can you guess what kind of seed 
dispersal these seeds are adapted for?
3.	 A farmer plants two varieties of maize side 
by side, but notices that seeds form only 
when pollen from one variety reaches the 
stigma of the other. What type of pollination 
is this?
Fig. 11.16
(a) Madar seeds
(b) Dandelion 
seeds
Meet a Scientist
P. Maheshwari, 
known as the 
‘Father of Indian 
Embryology’, 
was a leading 
scientist in the 
field of embryology which is 
the study of plant reproductive 
organs. He developed 
the technique of in-vitro 
fertilisation in flowering 
plants by successfully fusing 
an egg and male gamete in a 
test tube to create new hybrid 
plants. He was also one of 
the first scientists to grow 
plant embryos on artificial 
nutrient media. His book, An 
Introduction to the Embryology 
of Angiosperms (1950), became 
a classic and is still widely 
used by scientists around the 
world.
Sexual reproduction in plants has an applied importance in plant breeding. There are several 
methods of plant breeding, such as selective breeding, artificial hybridisation, genetically 
engineered crops, and more. In selective breeding, farmers select plants of desirable characters for 
reproduction. Process of artificial hybridisation involves removal of the stamens from the flowers, 
covering it with a bagging to prevent self-pollination, and manual transfer of the pollens with 
desired characters. Genetic engineering is also applied by inserting the genetic material of desired 
characters into the DNA of the selected varieties. This leads to the development of new varieties, 
such as high yielding varieties, disease resistant varieties, and so on. This has revolutionised crop 
production in agriculture.
Bridging Science and Society

Exploration|Grade 9
218
Fig. 11.17: Life cycle of a butterfly
egg
adult
larva
pupa
emergence
4.	 Why do animals 
with external 
fertilisation 
generally 
produce 
more eggs 
than animals 
with internal 
fertilisation?
5.	 In animals, which 
fertilisation 
method the 
gametes are more 
protected?
Pause and 
Ponder
11.3 Sexual Reproduction in Animals
Reproduction in animals takes place through asexual and/or sexual 
method(s). We have studied different methods of asexual reproduction in 
different organisms, such as budding and spore formation, earlier in this 
chapter. 
In many aquatic animals exhibiting sexual reproduction, 
such as frogs and most fish, fertilisation occurs outside the body. 
The female releases eggs into the water, and the male releases 
sperm over eggs for fertilisation to take place. This method of fertilisation 
is called external fertilisation. Although a large number of eggs are 
laid, many are destroyed by water currents or eaten by other animals. 
In reptiles, birds and mammals, fertilisation takes place inside the body 
of the female. This is called internal fertilisation. Here, the chances of 
survival of the young ones are generally higher because the fertilised egg 
or embryo is protected more in internal fertilisation (Table 11.4).
11.4 Variations in Reproduction in Animals
Animals show a wide variety of methods of sexual reproduction. However, 
all animals face the basic challenge of ensuring that the male and the 
female gametes meet, and that the young ones survive long enough to 
grow and reproduce. Study the information given in Table 11.4 for four 
categories of animals. 
Table 11.4:  Variation in reproductive strategies among animals
Animal
Habitat
Mode of fertilisation
Number of eggs 
produced
Estimated survival 
of young ones
Fish
Water
External
100s – 1000s at a time
Low
Frog
Water/land
External
5,000 – 50,000 at a time
Low
Lizard
Land
Internal
2 – 20 at a time
Moderate
Bird
Water/land
Internal
1 – 15 at a time
Moderate to High
Fish, amphibians, and insects produce several hundred 
to several thousand eggs at a time with yolk, which contains 
nutritive substances to nourish the developing embryos. The 
mother’s body cannot provide such large quantities of yolk for so 
many eggs. The strategy these species adopt is that the yolk in the 
egg is just enough to produce a larva, which hatches from the egg. 
The larva, then gets nutrition by eating organic wastes like rotten 
food, manures and so on, and grows. This stage is an intermediate 
stage in its development, which is essentially a feeding stage. 
Once enough nutrition is accumulated, a transformation takes 
place and the adult body is formed — as seen in organisms, such 
as butterfly (Fig. 11.17) and frogs.
In contrast, reptiles and birds lay eggs, and each egg contains 
enough yolk to nourish the developing embryo until it hatches 
into a young one. In mammals, the zygote grows and develops 
inside the female body.
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 10

219
Reproduction: How Life Continues
In some species, when the young ones are born, they are ready to find 
their own food, whereas in others an extended period of post-hatching or 
post-birth feeding and care is necessary. This broadly depends on how long 
the embryo develops inside an egg or inside the mother’s body. Mammals 
typically feed their young ones via breast milk for some duration after birth.
11.5 Reproduction in Human Beings
11.5.1 Reproductive maturity
You have learnt about the physical and emotional changes that 
take place as a child grows into an adult, when reproductive 
organs mature and begin producing gametes (sperm in male and 
egg in female). 
The 
human 
reproductive 
system 
consists 
of 
special 
organs
(Fig. 11.18 and Fig. 11.19). When a sperm meets an egg inside the female 
body, they form a zygote that develops into an embryo and eventually into 
a foetus in the uterus. In this section, we will study how gametes form and 
meet, and how new life develops in human beings.
11.5.2 What are the parts of the male reproductive 
system?
The male reproductive system (Fig. 11.18) 
has organs that produce male germ cells 
called sperm and help them transfer to the 
female body. Sperm are produced in two oval-shaped 
organs called testes (testis singular), present in a pouch 
of skin called the scrotum. The scrotum keeps the 
testes slightly cooler than normal body temperature, 
which is necessary for sperm formation. The testes 
also produce a hormone (chemicals that regulate 
different functions), which controls sperm production 
and causes the physical changes seen in boys during 
puberty.
From the testes, sperm travel through a long tube 
called the vas deferens, which ultimately opens into the 
urethra, a common passage for the urine and the sperm. 
Glands like the seminal vesicles and the prostate add 
fluids to nourish the sperm, and help them remain active 
and move. Each sperm has a head containing genetic 
material and a long tail that helps it swim towards 
the egg. 
11.5.3 What are the parts of the female 
reproductive system?
Look at the Fig. 11.19 and identify various parts of the 
female reproductive system. The female reproductive 
system has a pair of ovaries, oviducts (fallopian 
tubes), a uterus, and a vagina. The ovaries produce the 
female germ cells (eggs) and also release hormones. 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Cervix
Uterus
Fallopian tube
Ovary
Fig. 11.19: Female reproductive 
system
Vagina
Fig. 11.18: Male reproductive system
Vas  
deferens
Urethra
Prostate 
gland
Urinary 
bladder
Scrotum
Testis
Seminal vesicle
Penis

Exploration|Grade 9
220
The hormones bring about changes during puberty. The 
oviducts connect each ovary to the uterus. The uterus is 
a bag-like structure where a foetus develops. The uterus 
opens into the vagina through a narrow passage called 
the cervix. 
11.5.4 How are reproductive cells made?
The process of the formation of gametes is called 
gametogenesis. It takes place in the testes and the 
ovaries. You have learnt in Activity 11.4 that gametes 
are formed by meiosis, in which the number of 
chromosomes is reduced to half. In humans, cells have 
46 chromosomes, but sperm and eggs have only 23. This 
is important so that when they combine, the zygote 
has the same number of chromosomes as parents to 
form an individual. In males, gametogenesis results 
in the production of numerous tiny motile (moving), 
active sperm. In females, gametogenesis results in the 
formation of a single large egg. In sexual reproduction, 
male and female gametes differ greatly in size, number 
and structure (Table 11.5). 
Table 11.5: Structure, size, and number of male and female gametes
Feature
Sperm
Egg
Size
Very small
Large
Number produced
Millions
Few
Stored nutrients
Absent
Present
Motility
Actively motile
Non-motile
This asymmetry between the male and female gametes is seen across 
most of the animals.
11.5.5 What happens when a sperm meets an egg?
At birth, a girl’s ovaries already have millions of immature eggs. From 
puberty onwards, usually one mature egg is released every month from 
one of the ovaries. This is called ovulation. Before ovulation, the uterus 
starts to prepare itself; the inner lining becomes thick. As the ovulation 
happens, the egg travels from the ovary to the oviduct. During sexual 
intercourse, millions of sperm enter through the vagina. They swim 
through the reproductive tract and may reach the egg in 
the oviduct. If a sperm encounters an egg and succeeds 
in fusing with it, a zygote is formed (Fig. 11.20). The 
inner lining of the uterus becomes thicker and richer in 
blood vessels. The zygote undergoes a series of mitotic 
divisions while travelling to the uterus, and implants into 
the inner lining of the uterus to receive nourishment for 
development. This implantation marks the beginning 
of pregnancy. 
In-vitro Fertilisation 
(IVF) is a medical 
technique in which 
an egg and a sperm 
are combined 
outside the female 
body, usually in a laboratory 
dish. The resultant fertilised egg 
is then implanted in the uterus 
to begin a possible pregnancy. 
A baby born through this 
method is commonly known 
as a test tube baby, although 
the process actually occurs 
in a culture dish, not in a test 
tube. India holds a significant 
place in the history of IVF. In 
1978, Subhash Mukhopadhyay 
of Kolkata pioneered India’s 
first test tube baby, Kanupriya 
Agarwal (nicknamed Durga), 
through experimental IVF work. 
Meet a Scientist
+
=
Egg
Sperm
Zygote
Fig. 11.20: Process of fertilisation

221
Reproduction: How Life Continues
11.5.6 What happens when an egg is not fertilised?
If an egg is not fertilised, it remains viable for about a day and then it 
degenerates. The inner lining of the uterus, which became thick and rich 
with blood vessels to receive and nourish the developing zygote, is no 
longer needed. So, the lining sheds. This lining, along with some blood, 
leaves the body through the vagina. This process is called menstruation 
or a period, and usually lasts 3 to 7 days. You have read about this process 
earlier. Now, you can connect it to the events of ovulation and fertilisation.
The cycle of ovulation, preparation of the uterus and menstruation 
repeats typically every 21 – 35 days (often around 28 days), and usually begins 
at puberty, between the ages of 10 – 14 in girls and continues till menopause 
i.e., around age 50 (Fig. 11.21).
Day 1 – 5:
Menstruation
(Shedding of 
uterine lining)
Day 6 – 14:
Uterine lining 
gradually rebuilds
(Egg starts 
maturing in 
ovary)
Day 14:
Ovulation
(Ovary releases a 
mature egg)
Day 15 – 28:
Uterine lining becomes thicker 
and rich with blood vessels
(If no fertilisation happens, it starts 
breaking down on approximately. 
28th day and the cycle repeats)
Fig. 11.21: Key stages of the menstrual cycle across a typical 28-day period
What determines a baby’s biological sex?
So far, you have learnt that every person has two sex chromosomes. Females have XX and 
males have XY chromosomes. The mother always contributes an X chromosome to a baby 
and the father contributes either an X (Female: XX) or a Y (Male: XY) chromosome. Now, from 
the above information, can you predict who determines the sex of a baby?
Threads of Curiosity
Hygiene practices to follow during menstruation (period):
	y
Use menstrual products, such as sanitary pads (preferably biodegradable ones), tampons, 
menstrual cups, etc.
	y
Wash regularly — clean your genital area with water. Avoid using soap, as this can disrupt the 
natural bacterial balance.
	y
Hand washing is the key — always wash your hands with soap and water, before and after 
changing your sanitary pad.
	y
Proper disposal of used products — wrap used pads in newspaper or the wrapper they came 
in before disposing them in a bin. Do not flush them down the toilet.
	y
Proper care for reusable products — if you use reusable pads, follow the manufacturer’s 
instructions for cleaning. Ensure reusable pads are completely dry before their next use.
	y
Change menstrual products regularly — change pads in 4 – 6 hours, or more often if your flow 
is heavy.
Bridging Science and Society
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 8

Exploration|Grade 9
222
11.5.7 Pregnancy and childbirth
Pregnancy in humans lasts about nine months and is divided into 
three stages called trimesters. In the first trimester, the fertilised 
egg develops into an embryo during the first two months and major 
organs start forming during this time. From about the ninth week, 
the developing embryo is called a foetus, which continues to grow 
and develop. In the second trimester, the foetus grows bigger and 
stronger, and the mother can usually feel its movements. In the third 
trimester, the baby grows rapidly and gets ready for the life outside 
the womb (Figure 11.22). The uterus protects and nourishes the 
baby throughout this time. During childbirth, strong contractions 
of the muscles of the uterus help push the foetus out through the 
birth canal. In some cases, if a normal vaginal birth is not possible 
or safe for the mother or the foetus, doctors may use medical or 
surgical procedures to help deliver the baby safely.
1st Trimester
2nd Trimester
3rd Trimester
Fig. 11.22: Stages of pregnancy
After birth, a baby needs special care. Breastfeeding is essential 
because a mother’s milk provides complete nutrition and protects the 
infant from many diseases. Newborns must be kept warm, vaccinated on 
time and handled gently. The mother’s well-being is equally important. 
She requires nutritious food and adequate rest, and it is recommended 
for her to avoid harmful habits, such as smoking, consuming alcohol, or 
taking any medicines without medical advice. The health of the mother 
and the baby are closely connected, and require proper care and support.
6.	 Ravi suddenly notices that he is growing taller rapidly, his shoulders are broadening, 
and his voice cracks. What stage of life is he entering?
7.	 Rina’s period occurs every 28 days. Her last period was on the 5th of March. On which 
day is she most likely to get her next period?
8.	 A human zygote has just formed. How many chromosomes does it have?
Pause and Ponder
11.5.8 Mother’s health during pregnancy
A woman’s health during pregnancy plays a vital role in the baby’s growth 
and safety. She should eat a balanced diet rich in proteins, vitamins and 
minerals, attend regular medical check-ups, and follow her doctor’s 
advice regarding light exercise and rest. Her emotional well-being is also 
important, and support from family members helps her remain healthy 
and stress-free.
Menstruation is a 
sign of a healthy 
reproductive system, 
not something to be 
ashamed of. Using 
clean menstrual 
products, changing 
them as often as 
required, and 
disposing them 
responsibly helps 
in staying healthy 
and keeping your 
surroundings clean. 
Period is your pride

223
Reproduction: How Life Continues
More than 10 lakh Accredited Social Health 
Activist (ASHA) workers are health heroes 
across India. These community health workers 
are women trained to promote hygiene, 
immunisation, and family planning under the 
National Health Mission, especially in rural 
areas. They offer advice on maternal care, 
safe deliveries and contraceptive methods.
Bridging Science and Society
Threads of Curiosity
Some mothers experience a form of anxiety 
and fatigue after the delivery of a baby. This 
is called post-partum depression, and it is 
a recognised condition that can be treated. 
Mothers should be encouraged to talk to 
a healthcare worker (such as a doctor, 
nurse, or ASHA worker) if they feel low or 
overwhelmed, so that they can get proper 
help and support.
11.5.9 What does it mean to be sexually mature?
As we grow through adolescence, our bodies undergo many changes. 
A significant aspect of this growth is sexual maturation, meaning our 
bodies are becoming capable of reproduction. It is gradual and takes 
place alongside the overall body’s growth but this does not mean we 
are fully ready for adult responsibilities. Sexual maturity (like the 
production of sperm in boys and menstrual cycles in girls) happens 
gradually, but emotional maturity takes longer. Being emotionally 
mature means handling feelings, communicating clearly and making 
thoughtful decisions. 
11.5.10 How can unwanted pregnancies and infections be 
prevented?
During adolescence, the body becomes capable of reproduction but 
emotional and social maturity take longer to develop. Being ready for 
sexual activity is not only about physical changes but also about being able 
to make thoughtful and responsible decisions. Such responsible choices 
help prevent unplanned pregnancies, sexually transmitted infections and 
support healthy relationships.
Since sexual activity involves close physical contact, some infections can 
be transmitted from an infected person to an uninfected person. These are 
called Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) and include gonorrhoea, 
herpes, syphilis, genital warts, and HIV (which can eventually lead to 
AIDS). Some of these are not curable yet. Using condoms can prevent their 
transmission and also help prevent pregnancy. 
To 
prevent 
unwanted 
pregnancy, 
different 
contraceptive (pregnancy-preventing) methods can 
be used. Some of them act as barriers, like condoms 
or vaginal covers, which stop sperm from reaching the egg. 
Some methods involve medicines (oral pills) that change the 
release of eggs by altering hormones, though these may have 
some side effects. Another method is the use of Intra-Uterine 
Devices (IUDs), such as copper-T that are placed in uterus 
to avoid pregnancy, though they may sometimes irritate the 
uterus (Fig. 11.23). 
Pause and Ponder
  9.	What protective 
devices can be used 
during sexual activity 
to reduce the spread of 
STIs?
10.	 If a couple uses oral 
contraceptive pills but 
not condoms, which 
risks remain and why?
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 6

Exploration|Grade 9
224
Surgical methods are also used to stop unwanted pregnancies. 
These include blocking the vas deferens in males or the fallopian 
tubes in females, so that the sperm and the egg cannot meet. 
In some cases, unwanted pregnancies can be removed by surgery, 
generally only within the first trimester of pregnancy, when the 
embryo is very small. This procedure is called abortion. The 
practice of self-selective abortion is a significant concern, often 
driven by a preference for a specific gender. This practice can 
lead to a marked imbalance in the societal sex-ratio. So, prenatal 
sex determination is strictly prohibited by law in India. 
This is important to maintain sex ratio for healthy forward-
looking society.
Pause and Ponder
11. In many animals, the young ones can walk or find food soon after birth but human babies 
are completely dependent on adults for a long time. What might be some advantages and 
disadvantages of this for humans as a species?
Bridging Science and Society
Indian scientists at the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, 
developed the world’s first non-steroidal and non-hormonal oral 
contraceptive pill. Taken once weekly, it avoids side effects like 
weight gain, nausea, or headaches. Safe, convenient, and effective, it 
is provided free through the National Family Planning Programme.
At a Glance
	y Reproduction is the biological process by which living organisms 
produce new individuals of the same species. It ensures the 
continuity of life and the transfer of genetic information.
	y There are two main types of reproduction: asexual and sexual.
	y Asexual reproduction occurs in different ways, such as budding, 
spore formation and vegetative propagation in plants.
	y A flower is the reproductive organ of a plant, with male stamen and 
female pistil.
	y Pollination is the process of pollen transfer from anther to stigma, 
through self- or cross-pollination.
	y During fertilisation, the pollen tube carries the sperm cells to the 
ovule, where it fuses to form a zygote. After fertilisation, the ovule 
becomes the seed and the ovary becomes the fruit.
	y In humans, the testes produce sperm. Glands like testes, seminal 
vesicles and prostate produce male hormones.
	y Ovaries produce eggs and female hormones. Ovulation takes place 
around the 14th day of the menstrual cycle.
Fig. 11.23: Intra-Uterine 
Device
Copper-T

225
Reproduction: How Life Continues
	y Birth control methods include condoms, pills, IUDs (Copper-T), etc.
	y If fertilisation occurs, the zygote develops into an embryo and 
pregnancy begins. In human females, pregnancy usually lasts about 
nine months, during which the mother’s body undergoes many 
changes to support the baby’s growth.
	y It is important for the mother to have proper nutrition, check-ups 
and rest, avoid harmful substances for the baby’s healthy growth 
and support her own body during pregnancy.
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1.	 A flower’s anthers are removed before it matures. Later, pollen from 
another plant of the same species is dusted onto its stigma and seeds 
are produced. Which process has been ensured here?
	 (i)	 Self-pollination	
(ii)	 Cross-pollination
	(iii)	 Fertilisation	
(iv)	 Tissue culture
2.	 Arrange the following stages of sexual reproduction in plants in the 
correct order:
	 (i)	 Pollen germination on stigma	 (ii)	 Fertilisation
	(iii)	 Pollination	
(iv)	 Formation of zygote
3.	 Assertion (A): The zygote formed after fertilisation immediately 
attaches to the uterus wall.
Reason (R): The uterus wall is always prepared to receive the zygote.
(i)	 Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A. 
(ii)	 Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A. 
(iii)	 A is true, but R is false. 
(iv)	 A is false, but R is true.
4.	 Why does asexual reproduction produce offsprings that are genetically 
identical to the parent?
5.	 Explain why the menstrual cycle stops during pregnancy.
6.	 Why are flowers that bloom at night white or light in colour as 
compared to flowers that bloom during the day?
7.	 Why do vegetatively propagated plants tend to be more vulnerable to 
diseases than sexually reproduced plants?
8.	 If all flowers in a type of plant were only capable of self-pollination, 
how would it affect the genetic diversity over several generations? 
Explain.
9.	 A farmer wants to produce a large number of genetically identical 
plants quickly. Suggest suitable reproduction methods and explain 
why they are effective.

Exploration|Grade 9
226
10.	 Suresh prepares slides with pollen grains in different sugar 
concentrations (0%, 2.5%, 5%, 7.5%, 10%) to study the germination of 
pollen. 
(i)	 What are the different hypotheses which can be tested using this 
set-up?
(ii)	 What parameters should be kept the same in this set-up?
11.	 Look at the picture given below and think in line with the given prompts 
and find out which type(s) of pollination might have been followed in 
these flowers —
Tomato
Wheat
Papaya
   
  
Stamens cover the stigma.
Flowers open 
after pollination.
Male and female flowers 
are often borne on different 
papaya trees.
12.	 In the lower Himalayan region of northern India, apples are 
an important cash crop that contribute significantly to farmer’s 
livelihoods. The fruit yield in apple cultivation is declining 
continuously, associated with climate change and a significant decline 
in the population of natural pollinators. A researcher-farmer group set 
up two experimental apple orchards at two distinct locations: Places A 
and B. In apple orchards at Place A, they allowed natural pollinators 
Per cent
to pollinate the flowers of the apple. In apple 
orchards at Place B, they applied mixed 
farming techniques of beekeeping. Along with 
honey, the farmer yielded apples. The yield 
of apples is depicted in Fig. 11.24, in terms of 
fruit setting (number of fruits/the total number 
of corresponding fruit-bearing branches) and 
fruit drop (premature falling of developing 
fruits) in the two types of experimental places 
of apple orchards.
(i)	 What are the hypotheses the researcher-
farmers group has thought of for this 
investigation?
(ii)	 What are the different parameters in the 
experiment? 
(iii)	 Compare and analyse the data of two 
experimental orchards Places A and B, in 
terms of high yields of apple fruits. 
(iv)	 Based on your analysis, what do you infer from the data? 
13.	 A student claims, “In humans, ovulation always happens on day 14 of 
the menstrual cycle”. Critically examine this claim and state whether 
the claim is correct or not. Give at least two reasons for your answer.

227
Reproduction: How Life Continues
The Journey Beyond
	y Read about the ‘Seed Village Programme’ (Beej Gram Yojana) run by 
the Government of India. Why is it important to save indigenous seeds?
	y Prepare a report on IVF, its uses and drawbacks. Discuss it with your 
class.
	y Conduct a survey on crop fields. Interact with farmers on the crops 
grown on their farms and farm animals based on the following points —
(i)	 Which crops do they grow through vegetative propagation?
(ii)	 Which crops do they grow using seeds?
(iii)	 Which seeds do they use — indigenous varieties or hybrid varieties? 
Why? How do they develop hybrid varieties in their fields?
(iv)	 List the indigenous breeds and hybrid breeds of the farm animals 
they are using in their farming practices and how are they 
different from each other?
(v)	 Discuss in class, and make a report on how asexual and sexual 
methods of reproduction are useful in agriculture.
	y Explore the crop fields near your school and find out different 
pollination strategies adopted by different cereal and vegetable crop 
plants. Talk to farmers on the following points —
(i)	 Pollinators of different crops
(ii)	 Reason for the declining population of pollinators and their 
solutions
Observe the pollinators visiting your school garden. Notice and 
record their activity. Let each student take pictures of at least five 
different types of pollinators and which plants they visit. Compile the 
data and showcase your work to discuss how pollination occurs in 
different plants. 
	y Assist your elders in cutting fruits in the kitchen. While cutting fruits 
like lady finger, tomato, brinjal, capsicum, papaya, orange, muskmelon 
and more, make your observations based on the following and draw 
diagrams —
(i)	 When you cut a fruit longitudinally (Longitudinal Section: L.S.)
(ii)	 When you cut a fruit transversely (Transverse Section: T.S.)
(iii)	 Attachment of seeds
Link your observations of the L.S. and T.S. of the fruit with the internal 
structure of the ovary of same species.
Does a unicellular organism like amoeba or yeast ever ‘grow old’? 
When it divides, it produces almost two identical copies. So, does 
aging happen at all?
The Quest Continues …
(c) L.S. of Tomato flower
(a) L.S. of Tomato fruit
(b) T.S. of Tomato fruit
