Have you ever wondered why some plants can survive long 
droughts while others cannot? Or, how certain insects protect crops 
while others damage them?
The Earth is home to an enormous variety of life forms. From 
microscopic organisms invisible to the naked eye to giant trees, 
from glowing jellyfish to soaring eagles, life exists in countless 
forms and habitats — from the snow-clad Himalayas to the 
coral reefs of the Andaman Sea. This immense variety of living 
organisms is known as biodiversity. Biodiversity is essential for 
life on the Earth. Every organism plays a role in keeping nature 
stable and functioning. Microscopic algae in the oceans release 
most of the oxygen we breathe. Fungi and bacteria decompose 
fallen leaves, and convert waste into manure, making the soil 
fertile. Birds, bees and bats pollinate flowers, while plants capture 
sunlight to prepare food that support nearly all life on the planet. 
These interconnections help sustain ecosystems and make the 
Earth suitable for living organisms.
Humans, too, depend on biodiversity for food, shelter, 
medicines and livelihoods. For centuries, farmers relied on their 
practical knowledge to conserve diverse crop varieties with useful 
Patterns in Life: 
Diversity and 
Classification
	y
What do you 
understand by 
biodiversity?
	y
How does the 
grouping of 
organisms help 
us understand 
diversity?
	y
On what basis, are 
plants and animals 
classified?
	y
How does 
classification help 
address problems 
in farming?
Think It Over
Chapter 
12

229
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
characteristics, such as drought tolerance, pest resistance and their ability 
to grow in nutrient poor soils. They realised that diversity reduces the risk 
of crop failure and strengthens food security.
In such a vast diversity, organisms share certain similarities while also 
showing many differences. To study diversity systematically, scientists 
group and classify organisms based on their shared characteristics and 
evolutionary relationships. Classification helps us understand how 
organisms are related, how they function and how we can use this 
knowledge in activities, such as ecosystem management, biodiversity 
conservation, sustainable farming, and so on.
12.1 India as a Biodiversity Hotspot
The natural landscape of our country is 
diverse — with mountains in the north, desert 
in the west, rainforests in the North East India, 
plateaus in the south, and long coastlines along 
the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. Each of 
these regions has distinct soil types and different 
climatic conditions like temperature and rainfall. 
These diverse habitats together support a 
wide variety of species. Some of these species 
are restricted to particular regions of the world 
and are not found naturally anywhere else. Such 
species are called endemic species. For example, 
Nilgiri tahr (Fig. 12.1a), Lion-tailed macaque 
(Fig. 12.1b), Indian variety of the pitcher plant — 
Nepenthes khasiana (Fig. 12.1c) and Neelakurinji 
(Fig. 12.1d) are found only in India.
Regions that support a large number of 
endemic species and have undergone significant 
habitat loss are known as biodiversity hotspots. 
These areas are particularly important for 
biodiversity conservation. Regions, such as the 
Western Ghats, Indo-Burma (including North 
East India), the Himalayas, Sundaland (including 
the Nicobar Islands), are some examples of global biodiversity hotspots. 
These areas are especially rich in number and in the diversity of organisms. 
Protecting these regions is equally important, as they support food webs 
and help ecosystems remain healthy.
12.2 How has the Biodiversity Evolved? 
The biodiversity that we see today on the Earth was not always the same. 
Small differences among individuals affected their chances of survival 
and reproduction by helping them adapt to changed conditions. These 
differences accumulated over many generations and gave rise to new 
forms of life.
The diversity we see today is therefore, an outcome of continuous 
changes occurring over a vast span of time, shaped by interactions between 
Fig. 12.1: (a) Nilgiri tahr, (b) Lion-tailed macaque, 
(c) Nepenthes khasiana, and (d) Neelakurinji
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
230
organisms and their surroundings. The study of this biological diversity is 
possible through a systematic framework that is provided by classification.
India’s Scientific Contributions
Some ancient Indian traditions, such as the Sangam Tinai classification of 
landscapes and the protection of sacred groves, demonstrate a sophisticated 
literary and cultural understanding of landscapes, and their biota. These 
customs effectively preserved locally diverse habitats, aligning with 
contemporary ecological principles, even if it is not articulated as a formal 
ecological theory.
12.3 How to Classify Organisms?
Activity 12.1: Let us compare and classify
Fig. 12.2 shows the diversity of animals in an ecosystem. Observe the image 
carefully. Can you guess how the organisms are grouped in the image?
Fig. 12.2: Day and night view of an ecosystem
1.	 Ponder on the questions given below: 
	y Which animals can you identify in the given picture?
	y Where are they seen?
	y Which animals in the picture seem active: 
(i)	 during the day?
(ii)	 during the night?
(iii)	 both during the day and the night?
2.	 Record your observations in Table 12.1.

231
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Table 12.1: Observation table for recording the data
Organism 
(draw or write 
name)
Where do you see 
it? (flying high in 
air/flying near the 
ground/tree/water/
forest floor)
When does it 
appear to be 
active? (day/night/
unsure)
Any visible 
feature(s)
Owl
Tree
Night
Feathers
3.	 Now, try grouping the same organisms in more than one way. Each 
time change the criterion you are using for grouping (Table 12.2).
Table 12.2: Grouping the organisms
The grouping 
criterion
Which organisms fit 
in this group?
What feature or pattern 
helped you decide?
Carnivore
Eagle, tiger, leopard
Eating habits
You may notice that the same organism can fit into different groups 
depending on the criterion you choose. This leads to an important 
question: how do scientists decide which features to use while grouping 
the living organisms? This question leads us to the idea of classification, a 
systematic way of organising the Earth’s living diversity.
12.3.1 Some criteria to classify living organisms
Scientists often look at broad and easily visible features, and then look 
at more detailed features. They use a number of characteristics to group 
living organisms, some of which are given below:
1.	 External features — visible characteristics, such as shape, size and 
body organisation.
2.	 Mode of nutrition — autotrophic or heterotrophic.
3.	 Internal structures — skeletal patterns, presence or absence of organs 
and different types of tissues.
4.	 Cell structure — whether the organism is unicellular or multicellular, 
the cell is eukaryote or prokaryote, presence or absence of cell wall.
5.	 Ecological role — producer, consumer, or decomposer.
6.	 Reproduction — asexual and/or sexual methods.
7.	 Genetic similarity — similarities in inherited features, which scientists 
study in detail using DNA.
These features help in understanding the similarities and differences 
among organisms. Similar features in organisms suggest that they have 
evolved from common ancestors. 
1.	 If many 
organisms 
share common 
features, could 
they also share 
a common 
ancestry?
Pause and 
Ponder

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
232
12.4 The Need for Classification
Imagine walking into a huge library where thousands of books are scattered 
all over the floor. You want to read the book, On the Origin of Species 
by Charles Darwin. Where would you begin? Without arranging books 
into subjects, authors, or sections, finding any book would be difficult. 
In the same way, the Earth is home to millions of organisms. Therefore, 
classifying these organisms systematically helps us in understanding 
them better.
Activity 12.2: Let us read a case study
Carefully read the given case study of Pakke Tiger Reserve.
The Pakke Tiger Reserve in Arunachal Pradesh is a forest where 
scientists have recorded nearly 300 bird species, which is striking given 
that India as a whole has about 1,300 bird species. Pakke is also known 
for supporting four species of hornbills — the Rufous-necked Hornbill, 
the Oriental Pied Hornbill, the Great Hornbill, and the Wreathed Hornbill 
(Fig. 12.3). These large birds nest only in large, old trees with suitable 
cavities and feed on specific fruits. As a result, different hornbill species 
are found in different parts of the forest depending on tree size and 
fruit availability. Studying such patterns allows scientists to ask precise 
questions about biodiversity, such as —
	y How are species distributed within a forest? Which plants and animals 
are closely linked?
	y How does classifying the four hornbill species help us understand 
biodiversity?
Think and discuss the case based on the following questions —
(i)	 How can scientists keep track of so many species? 
(ii)	 The four hornbills look similar in some ways. What features can 
help scientists distinguish them from one another? 
(iii)	 What would happen if the large, old trees disappeared from the 
forest?
Many organisms show similarities in their external features, internal 
structure (such as tissues and organs) and cellular organisation. To make 
the study of such vast diversity easier, scientists group organisms based 
on their similarities and/or differences. This grouping helps to organise 
information, understand relationships among organisms and study life in 
a systematic manner. This scientific system of grouping living organisms is 
known as biological classification.
Biological classification helps us in various ways, such as — 
1.	 It makes the study of living organisms more organised and 
systematic.
2.	 It helps us understand the similarities and differences among living 
beings. 
3.	 It helps us understand how different organisms are related to one 
another and how they interact.
4.	 It helps us in identifying and naming the newly discovered organisms. 
5.	 It supports biodiversity conservation by identifying the organisms 
that are under the threat of extinction.
Fig. 12.3: Four different 
species of hornbill 
found in the Pakke 
Tiger Reserve
(a) Rufous-necked 
hornbill
(b) Oriental Pied 
hornbill
(c) Great hornbill
(d) Wreathed hornbill

233
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
6.	 It allows scientists all over the world to discuss about organisms 
using a common system.
12.5 Biological Classification Systems Over Time 
In the previous section, you have learnt to identify various criteria for 
classifying the huge biodiversity in the world. Scientists have developed 
different classification systems over time, based on the knowledge 
available.
Aristotle, around the 4th century BCE, grouped animals based on 
their habitat — land, water and air. He also grouped them based on 
their external appearances. However, this system had limitations 
because it relied mainly on easily observable external characteristics. 
In the 18th century, scientists introduced the two kingdom system. All 
living organisms were divided into Plantae and Animalia.
Plantae — organisms that do not move from 
one place to another and synthesise their own food.
Animalia — organisms that move from one 
place to another and depends on other organisms 
for food.
But this system created confusion. Where should 
organisms like Amoeba, Paramecium and bacteria 
be placed? Amoeba and Paramecium move like 
animals but are unicellular and heterotrophic. 
However, plants and animals are multicellular 
organisms. To address this, scientists added a 
third kingdom, Protista, to include unicellular 
microscopic organisms. 
As microscopes improved, scientists noticed 
an important difference. An amoeba has a true 
nucleus (membrane-bound) but bacteria do not. 
Since both are unicellular but very different, 
bacteria were placed in a separate kingdom 
called the Monera. This led to a four kingdom 
classification system — Plantae, Animalia, Protista 
and Monera. The kingdom Protista includes mostly 
unicellular organisms with a true nucleus. Later, 
scientists noticed that fungi like mushrooms, do 
not move like plants but have a heterotrophic 
mode of nutrition. They obtain nutrients by 
absorption, many absorb nutrients from dead and 
decaying matter (though some are symbiotic and 
some are parasitic). Therefore, fungi were placed 
in a separate kingdom. This resulted in the five 
kingdom classification, which includes Monera, 
Protista, Fungi, Plantae and Animalia (Fig. 12.4).
12.6 Five Kingdom Classification
In the five kingdom classification, all life forms are grouped based on 
certain common features.
The Rigveda and 
the Brihat Samhita 
classify animals on 
the basis of their 
habitat (terrestrial, 
aquatic and aerial), 
behaviour patterns 
and ecological roles.
India’s Scientific 
Contributions
Fig. 12.4: Timeline of the classification systems
Robert H.
Whittaker
Five Kingdom
Grouped life into
Monera, Protista,
Fungi, Plantae,
Animalia
1969
Four Kingdom
Grouped life into
Monera, Protista,
Plantae, Animalia
1938
Three Kingdom
Added Protista for
microscopic life
1866
Two Kingdom
Divided life into
Plantae, Animalia
1758
Artificial System
Grouped animals
by habitat — land, 
water and air 
4th century BCE
Herbert F. 
Copeland
Ernst 
Haeckel
Carolus 
Linnaeus
Aristotle 

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
234
Activity 12.3: Let us study
1.	 Study the concept map (Fig. 12.5).
2.	 List the criteria which form the basis of five kingdom classification.
Ecological role
Classification of Living Organisms
Prokaryotes
Cell type
Unicellular
Level of organisation
With cell wall
Cell structure
Chitin
Cellulose
Heterotrophic
Consumers
Animalia
Without cell wall
Heterotrophic 
Decomposers
Mode of nutrition
Mode of nutrition
Autotrophic
Producers
Plantae
Multicellular
Protista
Eukaryotes
Monera
(Bacteria, Archaea, 
Cyanobacteria)
(May or may 
not have a 
cell wall)
(Process of photosynthesis)
Fig. 12.5: Five kingdom classification
Fungi
Mushroom   Yeast
Aspergillus
(Amoeba, 
Paramecium, 
Chlamydomonas, 
Euglena)
Primitive nucleus 
(Unbounded 
membrane)
(Depend on 
others for 
food)
Membrane-bound
nucleus
Mosses
Grasses
Ferns
Pines
Roses
Bird
Cat
Human
Ant
Snake
Frog
(Depend on others for food)
3.	 Compare the criteria you have listed after studying the concept map 
and the criteria given below:
	y Cell type — prokaryote or eukaryote 
	y Cell structure — presence or absence of a cell wall 

235
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
	y Level of organisation — unicellular or multicellular 
	y Mode of nutrition — autotrophic or heterotrophic  
12.6.1. Kingdom Monera — Unicellular prokaryotes
Activity 12.4: Let us explore
1.	 In the school laboratory, observe the available permanent slides of 
bacteria and cyanobacteria under the microscope.
2.	 Compare them with Fig. 12.6.
What do you observe? Bacteria and cyanobacteria are single-celled 
prokaryotes that are grouped under Monera (Fig. 12.6). Bacteria are found 
everywhere, including soil, water, air, hot springs and other extreme 
environments where most organisms cannot survive and they are present 
even inside the human bodies. They are also found in the gut of ruminants 
and are responsible for the production of biogas from the dung of these 
animals. Some bacteria are harmful (pathogens) and cause diseases 
but many are useful like Lactobacillus and Rhizobium. Cyanobacteria 
are autotrophs and decomposers. In addition to nutrient cycling, some 
bacteria also break down pollutants like oil, pesticides, sewage, and so on.
Bridging Science and Society
Ram Bux Singh is popularly known as the ‘Father of 
Modern Biogas’. He was a pioneering Indian scientist who 
contributed to the development of biogas technology. In 1957, 
he established India’s first scientifically designed biogas 
plant at Ramnagar, Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh, which marked 
the beginning of systematic modern biogas research in the 
country. He later worked extensively on developing low-cost, 
efficient biogas plants for rural areas. He also served as an international 
consultant and helped set up biogas plants in several countries. His 
lifelong efforts played a crucial role in promoting renewable energy, 
waste management and sustainable development through technology.
12.6.2 Kingdom Protista — Unicellular eukaryotes
All single-celled eukaryotes without cell wall or with cell wall made up of 
cellulose are grouped under the kingdom protista. They are microscopic 
and highly diverse organisms. You can study some of these protists 
(Fig. 12.7) by making a slide from hay infusion as explained below.
Activity 12.5: Let us make
To make a hay infusion, follow the steps given below —
1.	 Collect a small sample of grass after the lawn has been 
mowed, or collect straw or fodder.
2.	 Take a small glass bottle and fill one fourth of it with the 
grass, straw or fodder.
3.	 Fill the bottle with stagnant water or pond water and mix 
it with the collected plant material.
4.	 Cover the bottle with a muslin cloth and tie it using a thread.
5.	 Keep the bottle aside undisturbed for a week.
Fig. 12.6 Members of 
the Kingdom Monera
Amoeba
Euglena
Paramecium
Fig. 12.7: Microscopic illustration of 
common protists
Cyanobacteria 
(blue-green algae) 
were among the 
first organisms 
to produce 
oxygen through 
photosynthesis. 
About 2.5 billion 
years ago, oxygen 
accumulated in 
the atmosphere, 
made the Earth 
suitable for other 
forms of life. 
Fossils of ancient 
cyanobacteria 
are found in 
structures called 
stromatolites. 
They were  found 
in Rajasthan and 
Madhya Pradesh. 
They provide some 
of the earliest 
evidence of life on 
the Earth.
Threads of 
Curiosity

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
236
6.	 Slightly open the mouth of the bottle by removing the muslin cloth, 
just enough to insert a dropper inside it and carefully take a drop 
of water.
7.	 Put the drop of water on a clean slide and observe it under a 
microscope.
Caution: The hay infusion may smell bad. Therefore, take 
precaution during lab exercises.
	y Wear a lab coat, mask and hand gloves.
	y Discard the hay infusion after autoclaving.
Do you notice moving organisms in the drop of water under the 
microscope? Can you identify them by comparing them with Fig. 12.7?
Protista includes single-celled eukaryotic organisms that live in 
water or moist places (Fig. 12.7). Some are autotrophic and others are 
heterotrophic. Protists are an important link in aquatic food chains, 
some produce oxygen while others serve as food for small animals. Some 
protists function as decomposers and help in nutrient cycling.
12.6.3 Kingdom Fungi — Multicellular, heterotrophic 
eukaryotes with a cell wall
Fungi are mostly multicellular eukaryotes with cell walls made of chitin. 
They do not make their own food. They either absorb nutrients from 
dead or decaying matter through fine filaments (which together form 
a network known as mycelium). Most of the fungi are saprophytes and 
therefore, they play a very important ecological role as decomposers, 
that means, they feed on dead organic matter, such as fallen leaves, twigs 
or dead organisms. They break down the complex organic matter into 
simpler substances and make them readily available in soil as minerals. 
Some of the fungi establish a mutualistic (symbiotic) relationship with 
other organisms while others live as parasites, and cause diseases in 
plants and animals. They reproduce both sexually and asexually, often 
by forming spores, and grow best in warm and moist conditions.
Yeast (Fig. 12.8a) and Aspergillus mould are common fungi. However, 
yeast is a unicellular organism, since its cell wall is made up of chitin, 
it has been put under fungi. Mushrooms (Fig. 12.8c) are macroscopic 
fungi that reproduce by spores. Some fungi like Aspergillus (Fig. 12.8b) 
and Penicillium are used to make enzymes and antibiotics. Fungi are 
important decomposers and help recycle nutrients. Without them, the 
decay of dead plants and animals would be greatly reduced, adversely 
affecting the soil fertility and ecological balance.
Wild edible mushrooms are a valuable dietary food with high nutritional and medicinal values. 
They are important forest resources used and conserved by many communities, including tribal 
communities in India. These communities possess traditional knowledge about the edible and 
poisonous mushrooms based on folk taxonomy. Some wild mushrooms are used as sources of 
food and some as medicine for treating various ailments. Nowadays, mushroom cultivation is 
becoming a promising vocation for livelihood. Mushroom farming is easy and accessible due to its 
minimal space requirement, low investment and fast life cycle (30 – 45 days).
Bridging Science and Society
(c) Mushrooms
Fig. 12.8: Common fungi
Aspergillus
(a) Yeast
2.	 How can a 
single-celled 
organism carry 
out all its life 
processes when 
billions of cells 
are required to 
perform similar 
functions in 
multicellular 
organisms like 
us?
Pause and 
Ponder

237
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
12.6.4 Kingdom Plantae — Multicellular, autotrophic 
eukaryotes with a cell wall
Plants are multicellular, autotrophic organisms that perform photosynthesis. 
Their cells have a rigid cell wall primarily made up of cellulose, which 
provides support and protection. All plants belong to the kingdom Plantae. 
Plants form the base of most of the food chains and release oxygen which 
is essential for life on the Earth. Kingdom Plantae is further divided into 
five classes.
Class
Plantae
Thallophyta
Bryophyta
Pteridophyta
Gymnosperm
Angiosperm
Thallophyta (algae) — Primitive plants
Thallophytes (thallos means undifferentiated body and phyton means 
plant) are among the simplest plant forms and are mostly found in water or 
moist environments. They form a thallus, a simple body that allows direct 
exchange of gases, nutrients and water with the surroundings. They are 
well-adapted to aquatic habitats. An example of Thallophyta is Spirogyra 
(Fig. 12.9).
Bridging Science and Society
Have you ever seen white-green patches on the tree trunk, damp walls or 
stones? What do you think about these patches? Visit a village and talk to 
an elderly person about these patches. They recognise these patches as an 
indicator of a pollution-free environment. In fact, the lichens change their 
colour with air pollutants. Based on their colour, researchers can find out the 
concentration of pollutants in the air. Therefore, they are natural bioindicators 
for the measurement of air quality. Villagers also collect these as forest produce 
for utilisation in their daily life. Some types of lichen, commonly called patthar 
ke phool are used as a spice, while some are used as medicines, and also for 
making dyes since ancient times to give maroon, violet, or burgundy colour to 
woollen and silk fabrics. Biologically, these are symbiotic (mutual associations 
of two organisms) — one partner is an autotrophic alga and the other one is a 
heterotrophic fungus. Fungal partners provide protection, and algal partners 
photosynthesise and provide food. Some lichens are poisonous, so it is important 
to classify and identify them properly for safe and proper utilisation.
Bryophyta — First steps on land, still need water
Bryophytes (bryon means moss and phyton means plant), such as mosses and 
liverworts (Fig. 12.10), which represents an important shift from water to 
land. You might have seen them as large green mats on damp rocks or even 
on the walls of some old buildings, or even on soil surfaces as green mats. 
Bryophytes have a more differentiated body as compared to thallophytes. 
They have root-like structures called rhizoids, and may possess stem-like 
and leaf-like simple structures. Bryophytes survive in moist and shady 
places, growing as green mats on the soil, especially during the monsoons. 
Examples of Bryophytes include Marchantia and moss (Fig. 12.10).
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 10
Fig. 12.9: Spirogyra
Fig. 12.10: Members 
of class Bryophyta 
(a) Marchantia
(b) Moss

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
238
Activity 12.6: Let us explore
1.	 Observe some bryophytes with the help of a hand lens. Collect 
them in a watch glass. 
2.	 Put a drop of water on it and observe it under a dissecting 
microscope. A dissecting microscope enables us to view 
magnified images of live specimens.
How do they differ from the leaves that you usually observe in 
plants in your surroundings?
Bryophytes require water for reproduction. Therefore, they 
are called the ‘amphibians’ of the plant kingdom. They show how 
plants began to colonise land, while remaining dependent on 
moisture.
Pteridophyta — Adaptation to land and having structural 
transport system
Look at Fig. 12.11a. What changes do you observe in the 
plant structure as compared to thallophytes and bryophytes? 
Pteridophytes (pteris derived from pteron means feather and 
phyton means plant), such as ferns, possess true roots, stems and 
leaves. How do you think that the transport of water and food 
takes place in all parts of these plants? One possible explanation 
is that ferns have specialised transport tissue. How can you test 
this explanation? A cross section of the stem of a fern can be cut 
and seen under a microscope. You may also observe a permanent 
slide of a cross section of a fern stem available in your school 
laboratory. The cross section shows vascular tissues, xylem and 
phloem, which transport water and food, respectively, throughout 
the plant (Fig. 12.11b). Pteridophytes require aquatic conditions 
for reproduction and do not produce seeds.
Activity 12.7: Let us compare
1.	 Recall the cross section of the sunflower stem you have 
studied in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.7).
2.	 Compare the cross section of the stem of a fern, a pteridophytic 
plant (Fig. 12.11) with a cross section of sunflower stem you 
studied in Chapter 3 (Fig. 3.7). 
3.	 What difference do you observe in the vascular tissue of 
the fern stem and of the stem of higher plants? Write your 
observations. Share and discuss them in class.
Gymnosperms — Reproduction without water
Gymnosperms (gymnos means naked and spermos means seed), 
such as pines (Fig. 12.12) and cycads are well-adapted to cold and 
dry regions. Their needle-like or scale-like leaves reduce water loss 
and withstand harsh conditions. They produce seeds, which protect 
the developing embryo and contain stored food. Gymnosperms do 
not require aquatic conditions for fertilisation. Their seeds are not 
enclosed in fruits and are often exposed on cones.
Fig. 12.11: (a) Fern, and (b) cross 
section of a fern stem
Xylem
Phloem
(a)
(b)
Fig. 12.12: Cone of pine
3.	 Which plant 
features reduce their 
dependence on water 
but still require moist 
conditions?
4.	 Why do taller plants 
need specialised 
transport tissues?
5.	 How do seeds and 
fruits affect, where 
and how plants can 
survive?
Pause and 
Ponder

239
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Angiosperms — Efficient reproduction and seed dispersal
Angiosperms (angeion means vessel and spermos means seeds) 
or flowering plants, represent plants with the most complex 
body organisation.
They produce flowers and fruits (Fig. 12.13). Flowers attract pollinators, 
increasing the efficiency of reproduction, while fruits help spread seeds to 
new locations. These features allow angiosperms to occupy a wide range of 
environments. Therefore, they are the most diverse plant group on the Earth.
Activity 12.8: Let us discuss
Collect different leaves from your surroundings, and observe their shape 
and venation. Group them as monocots or dicots. Discuss how their 
structures help them adapt in different conditions to survive.
One of the earliest scientific books on Indian plants, Hortus Malabaricus, was compiled in 
the 17th century by Hendrik van Rheede with the help of Itty Achudan (an Indian Herbalist, 
Botanist and Physician) and other local experts. It describes hundreds of plant species and their 
medicinal uses, showing how traditional knowledge and science can work together.
Bridging Science and Society
Different plant groups present different ways of solving problems, each 
with advantages and challenges or exceptions for survival.
Activity 12.9: Let us study
1.	 Carefully study the salient features of each plant group.
2.	 Analyse the salient features, and write the advantages for survival of 
the group and the exceptions or challenges faced in the given columns.
Table 12.3: Classes of Kingdom Plantae with their advantages and challenges
Plant groups and salient features
Advantages of the 
group for survival
Exceptions/
Challenges
Thallopyta
	y
Their body is like a thallus which facilitates easy 
absorption of water and nutrients, and exchange of 
gases from the surroundings.
	y
Simple plant body 
facilitates survival 
and its dispersal in 
water.
	y
They cannot live 
on land. 
__________________ 
__________________
Bryophyta
	y
Unlike algae, this group of plants began to colonise 
land but with strong dependence on moisture.
	y
Plant body shows slight differentiation in body parts 
but not in root, stem, or leaves.
	y
They lack vascular tissues for transporting water and 
food. 
	y
They require water for reproduction, as male 
reproductive cells must swim to reach female cells. 
	y
They are plant 
amphibians. 
	y
Their body is 
adapted to live on 
moist land. 
____________________ 
____________________
	y
They always 
need moisture. 
__________________ 
__________________
Pteridophyta
	y
Pteridophytes possess true roots, stems and leaves. 
	y
They have vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) that 
transport water and food throughout the plant. 
	y
They still depend on water for reproduction. 
	y
They do not produce seeds.
	y
They live on land. 
	y
They transport food 
and water to all 
parts of the plant. 
____________________ 
____________________
	y
Reproduction 
does not take 
place without 
water. 
__________________ 
__________________
Fig. 12.13: An 
angiosperm tree 
(Gulmohar)
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 2

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
240
Gymnosperm
	y
They live on land.
	y
They have needle-like leaves which reduce water 
loss.
	y
Water is not essential for fertilisation.
	y
Their seeds are not enclosed in fruits and are 
exposed on cones.
	y
Leaves are adapted 
for dry conditions.
	y
They do not 
require water for 
reproduction.
	y
They form seeds for 
continuity of life. 
____________________ 
____________________
	y
Seeds are not 
covered in the 
form of fruits. 
__________________ 
__________________
Angiosperm
	y
They possess well-developed roots, stems and 
leaves.
	y
They undergo sexual reproduction through 
flowers.
	y
Their seeds are enclosed within fruits.
	y
Their seeds disperse through insects or birds, 
animals, wind, or water.
	y
They produce flowers, 
fruits and seeds.
	y
They have a  
well-developed 
system for 
reproduction. 
	y
They produce seeds 
for continuity of life. 
	y
Their seeds are 
covered. 
_______________________
_______________________
	y
Reproduction is 
dependent on 
pollination by 
different agents. 
	y
They have 
complex 
processes 
through a 
well-developed 
tissue system. 
__________________ 
__________________
From algae to angiosperms, plant groups show a sequence of structural 
changes that help plants meet the challenges of life on land. Early plants 
relied on water for support and reproduction. Gradually, plant groups 
evolved transport tissues, seeds and flowers.
Overall, the diversity of plant forms reflects multiple ways of balancing 
growth, transport, reproduction and survival in different environments.
12.6.5 Kingdom Animalia — Multicellular, heterotrophic 
eukaryotes
Animals are multicellular and heterotrophic organisms. They depend on 
other organisms for their food. Most animals exhibit the characteristics 
of locomotion, rapid response to stimuli and coordinated behaviour. These 
abilities allow animals to actively search for food, avoid predators and 
interact dynamically with their surroundings.
One of the major criteria for classifying animals is the presence or 
absence of a notochord, which is a flexible rod-shaped structure. Based on 
the absence or presence of the notochord, animals are classified into two 
groups — non-chordata (invertebrata) and chordata. In some chordates, 
notochord acts as a precursor for the development of the vertebral column. 
The chordata is further classified as protochordata and vertebrata.
Invertebrates — Animals without a notochord
Invertebrates lack a notochord, yet they show a wide range of body 
organisation, from a simple structure to complex organ systems. Studying 
invertebrates allows us to trace how the animal body gradually changed 
over time, leading to advancement in traits like movement, diverse 

241
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
feeding habits, and enhanced control and coordination, while also 
introducing  exceptions and new challenges.
Porifera (pore-bearers) — Multicellularity without tissues
Sponges (Fig. 12.16a) represent one of the simplest animal body plans. 
They are multicellular but lack organisation of tissues and organs. 
Numerous pores in their body allow water to continuously flow 
through it, bringing food particles and oxygen directly to individual 
cells, carrying the waste away. Sponges remain fixed in one place and 
are found in aquatic environments. Do you think they would be able to 
survive on land? Why or why not?
Cnidaria — True tissues and active feeding
Cnidarians, such as Hydra (Fig. 12.14), jellyfish (Fig. 12.16b) and corals show 
a major change in body organisation. Tissue-level organisation is present in 
them which allows specialised cells to perform specific functions, such as 
tentacles, which are used for capturing prey. Unlike poriferans, cnidarians 
can catch their prey using tentacles instead of depending on water currents 
to bring food particles inside through pores. However, cnidarians possess a 
single opening that functions for both food intake and waste removal. Can 
you hypothesise what limitations this body structure might have?
Platyhelminthes (flatworms) — Bilateral symmetry and 
directional movement
Flatworms show organisational advancement through bilateral symmetry 
(organism’s body can be divided into two halves along one plane), in 
which the body has distinct head-tail and front-back regions. This body 
organisation allows better coordination of movement and this is the 
beginning of directional activity. Their flattened bodies permit efficient 
diffusion of gases without specialised respiratory organs but there is still a 
single opening for food intake and waste elimination.
Many flatworms have adopted a parasitic lifestyle. Hooks and suckers 
are present in the parasitic forms which helps them to attach firmly to the 
host tissues for obtaining nutrients (Fig. 12.16c).
Some infectious diseases are caused by parasitic worms. They enter our bodies through 
contaminated water and food. They live inside our body, especially in the alimentary 
canal (the digestive system). These worms take nutrients from our body and live like 
parasites (the organism that lives in or on another organism is called the host). For this 
reason, it is suggested to wash your hands properly, maintain personal hygiene and good 
sanitary habits, consume properly cooked food and boiled or filtered drinking water.
Bridging Science and Society
Nematoda (roundworms) — Efficient body design with two 
openings
Roundworms have elongated, cylindrical bodies (Fig. 12.16d). This body 
structure allows their efficient movement through soil, water, or host 
tissues. This body form increases the range of environment in which 
Research studies 
show that one 
kilogram of sponge 
can filter up to 
24,000 litres of sea 
water per day.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Fig. 12.14: 
Longitudinal section of 
hydra showing tissue 
level organisation
Opening

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
242
roundworms can survive, despite relatively simple internal organisation. 
The body has two openings (mouth and anus). The organ system level of 
body organisation is distinct in male and female worms.
Annelida (segmented worms) — segmentation and body cavities
Annelids, such as earthworms (Fig. 12.16e), represent a notable development 
in body organisation. Their bodies are cylindrical and are divided into 
segments. What advantages segmentation might offer to an organism? 
Observing how an earthworm moves may help you form a hypothesis. 
They possess organ system level of organisation. Presence of muscles help 
them in locomotion, and nerve cord helps in control and coordination.
Segmentation allows greater flexibility and more precise control of 
movements. A body cavity is also present in them as shown in Fig. 12.15.
Arthropoda — Jointed appendages and an external skeleton
Arthropods (arthro means limbs and poda means appendages) includes 
insects, crabs (Fig. 12.16f) and spiders. They have segmented bodies with 
different segments specialised for different functions. A defining structural 
feature of arthropods is the development of a hard external skeleton (rigid 
external covering). What advantages can the outer covering provide?
This outer covering provides protection, reduces water loss and 
supports powerful muscles, allowing arthropods to survive in dry and 
exposed environments.
6.	 An earthworm (annelida) and a beetle (arthropoda), both have segmented 
bodies but the beetle has a hard external skeleton. How does the beetle’s 
external skeleton help it survive? 
Pause and Ponder
Image
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Porifera
Cnidaria
Platyhelminthes
Nematoda
Habitat
Water (Marine)
Water  
(Fresh and marine) 
Water/inside host
Soil/water/inside 
host
Level of 
organisation
Cellular
Tissue
Organ
Organ system 
(digestive system)
Skeleton
X
X
X
X
Fig. 12.16: The animal kingdom
Body 
cavity
Fig. 12.15: Internal 
structure of an 
earthworm: Organ 
formation and body 
cavity

243
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Mollusca — Organ system level organisation with soft bodies
Molluscs, such as snails (12.16g), squids and octopuses show organ system 
level organisation with soft bodies. In many molluscs, the development of a 
shell provides protection to these soft bodies. Their body is segmented with 
a distinct head, a muscular foot and a hump.
This group shows how a basic body plan can be modified in different 
directions depending on environmental demands.
Echinodermata — Internal support without a notochord
Echinoderms (echinos means spiny and derma means skin), such as 
starfish (Fig 12.16h) and sea urchins possess a hard internal skeleton 
made of calcium carbonate. Although they lack a notochord, this internal 
skeleton provides them protection and controlled movement. Their body 
organisation is quite like that of more complex animals, showing a gradual 
shift towards internal skeletal support.
Looking across invertebrates
From sponges to echinoderms, animal body structure shows a pattern 
of increasing complexity in body organisation. New structural features 
improve feeding, movement and protection but often introduce new 
challenges. These help explain survival in diverse environments.
Protochordates — The appearance of the notochord
Protochordates (like Amphioxus) possess a notochord at least once during 
their life. This structure provides internal support without restricting 
movement and represents a crucial change in body organisation. 
Protochordates are a primitive type of chordates which help us understand 
how animals with a notochord may have arisen from simpler forms.
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Annelida
Arthropoda
Mollusca
Echinodermata
Moist soil/water
Land/water
Water/moist land
Marine water
Organ system
Organ system
Organ system
Organ system
X
Exoskeleton
Exoskeleton
Endoskeleton

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
244
Vertebrates — Animals with a backbone
Vertebrates possess a vertebral column (backbone), an internal skeletal 
structure that supports the body and protects vital organs, such as the 
brain and the spinal cord. This internal framework allows a larger body 
size, efficient movement and the development of complex organ systems. 
Vertebrates show advanced sensory abilities and coordinated behaviour. 
Vertebrates are classified into five groups, namely fish, amphibians, 
reptiles, birds and mammals based on the broad patterns of their habitat 
use, body covering and reproduction. 
How do forests with rich and highly diverse flora and fauna work as a barrier and reduce the 
impact of disasters?
Forests with rich biodiversity play a vital role to create physical, biological and chemical 
barriers to protect against challenges. Some of the examples are as follows:
	y
Large diversity of trees in mangrove forests helped during the super cyclone that hit 
Orissa in 1999. Villages with more mangroves experienced less destruction.
	y
Rich biodiversity generally correlates with lower tick-borne disease risk. In the Western 
Ghats of India, where forest diversity acts as a biological barrier against Monkey Fever 
(Kyasanur Forest Disease, KFD), as many animals are the hosts where the virus cannot 
replicate inside their bodies. 
	y
Diverse microorganisms in forest soils and plant roots absorb, transform, or break down 
pollutants. This improves water quality and protects ecosystems. Mangrove soils trap 
sediments and heavy metals, preventing pollution from spreading into oceans and rivers.
Bridging Science and Society
12.7 Adaptations as Outcomes of Structural Change
The diversity seen in animals today are outcomes of changes in the body 
structure over long periods of time. Fins and gills allow fish to move and 
breathe in water. Feathers and hollow bones make flight possible in birds. 
Fat storage in camels and thick fur in polar bears illustrate how structural 
features support survival under extreme conditions. In mammals, 
mammary glands represent an additional structural and functional 
change that improves the survival of young ones. These features are 
interconnected and reflect how different vertebrates tackle the challenges 
of survival in different environments. All these characteristics show that 
animal diversity reflects a wide range of body forms found in organisms 
living under different environmental conditions.
12.7.1 The hierarchical nature of classification
Observe and analyse Fig. 12.17. What do you infer? Classification follows a 
step-by-step order, starting from very broad groups, and moving towards 
smaller and more specific ones. At each lower level, organisms share more 
common features. Every lower group is a part of the group above it.
Kingdom 
 Phylum 
 Class 
 Order 
 Family 
 Genus 
 Species
This arrangement works like an address. Just as a house address helps 
us locate a place exactly, classification helps scientists identify, compare 
and study organisms accurately, and understand how they are related.

245
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Fig. 12.17: Pyramids showing levels, from kingdom at the top to species at the base, with 
the examples of a tiger and a pea plant
Tiger
Kingdom
Animalia
Phylum
Chordata
Sub-phylum
Vertebrata
Class
Mammalia
Order
Carnivora
Family
Felidae
Genus
Panthera
Species
P. tigris
Kingdom
Phylum
Class
Order
Family
Genus
Species
P. sativum
Pisum
Fabaceae
Fabales
Magnoliopsida
Magnoliophyta
Plantae
Pea
Kingdom
Plantae
Phylum
Magnoliophyta
Class
Magnoliopsida
Order
Fabales
Family
Fabaceae
Genus
Pisum
Species
P. sativum
Kingdom
Phylum
Sub-phylum
Class
Order
Family
Genus
Species
Panthera
Felidae
Carnivora
Vertebrata
Mammalia
Chordata
Animalia
P. tigris
12.8 Scientific Naming — The Binomial System
A tiger is called bagh in Hindi, or puli in Tamil, tiger in English and tigre 
in French. If people from different regions discuss this animal, confusion 
may arise. To avoid this, scientists use a universal system of naming living 
organisms called binomial nomenclature. This system was introduced by 
Carolus Linnaeus in the 18th century. According to this, every organism 
has a scientific name with two parts, written in Latin or a Latinised form
(Table 12.3).

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
246
Table 12.3: Scientific names of organisms in the binomial 
system of nomenclature
S. No.
Common name
Scientific Name
1.
Tiger
Panthera tigris
2.
Mango
Mangifera indica
The first word, Panthera or Mangifera, is the name of the genus 
and the second, tigris or indica, is the name of the species. A genus 
groups closely related species that share common features, in this 
case, Panthera tigris (tiger) and Panthera leo (lion) under  the genus 
Panthera — the roaring cats (possessing the ability to roar), have 
similar skull structure, and so on. The species name indicates a 
group of organisms that consists of similar individuals capable of 
interbreeding and producing offsprings. Together, the genus and 
species name form a unique scientific name used worldwide.
Fig. 12.18: Example 
illustrating a scientific name
Rules for writing the scientific names
1.	 The name has two parts — genus and species.
2.	 The genus name begins with a capital letter and comes first, followed 
by the species name, which is written in small letters (lower case).
3.	 The scientific name is written in italics when printed, or underlined 
when handwritten (Fig. 12.18).
The five kingdom classification offered a more comprehensive 
way to group organisms compared to the previous systems, 
but it still could not fully explain the diversity of life. 
Latest advances in genetic research aided in modifying this 
classification. With advances in microscopes and genetic 
studies, scientists began to compare organisms at 
the DNA level. As you have studied in Chapter 2, 
every living cell contains genetic material (DNA), 
which carries the instructions for its growth and function. 
Organisms with similar DNA are considered to have a common ancestry. Based 
on the genetic data, Carl Woese (1977) proposed the three domain system 
(Fig. 12.19) —
	y Bacteria
	y Archaea
	y Eukarya
This system showed that microscopic life forms are far more diverse than 
previously believed.
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 12.19: Three 
domains of life
Eukarya
Archaea
Bacteria
Next
Level
Up

247
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Threads of Curiosity
Why do classification systems keep changing? Does that 
indicate how science works? Yes, science evolves and 
progresses as we learn new things. For example, Aristotle’s 
system worked for his time, but with new tools (like 
microscopes) and technological advancements (like staining 
techniques), scientists discovered microorganisms. These 
discoveries helped us understand the natural world better. 
Accordingly, the biological classification changed. The 
biological classification (and science) thus, is an ongoing 
process of reasoning and change. 
12.9 Fossils as Evidence
When we talk of diversity changing over time, what 
evidence do we have? Fossils are preserved remains of 
plants and animals found in layers of rocks, sand and 
mud. Generally, older layers contain simpler organisms, 
while newer layers show more complex forms. From 
giant dinosaurs to early humans and ancient plants, some 
important fossils have been discovered in India. Fossils act 
as natural records that help us understand how life has 
changed over millions of years. 
12.10 Biodiversity Under Threat
Each species, large or small, plays an important role in 
nature. Plants produce food and oxygen, animals pollinate 
flowers and disperse seeds, and microorganisms recycle 
nutrients. Human activities, such as pollution, deforestation, 
the overuse of resources and climate change are reducing 
biodiversity. When one species disappears, others that 
depend on it may also decline in number and eventually 
also, disappear.
Threads of Curiosity
When scientists discover a new organism, they compare it with 
the already known species. Sometimes, the species name reflects 
their place of discovery, or honours a scientist. The Purple Frog 
(Nasikabatrachus sahyadrensis) from Kerala has a species name 
after the Sahyadri Hills (Fig. 12.20).
The Purple Frog lives underground for most of the year and 
comes out only during the monsoon to breed. It belongs to an 
ancient family of frogs as understood from fossils. Its discovery 
in 2003 helped scientists understand ancient amphibian groups 
and highlighted the need for biodiversity conservation in the 
Western Ghats.
Fig. 12.20: A purple frog resting on 
wet soil
Birbal Sahni 
was an eminent 
scientist who 
studied fossil 
plants. He 
founded the Birbal Sahni 
Institute of Palaeosciences 
(BSIP) in Lucknow, which 
continues his work on ancient 
plants and past environments 
even to this day. His studies 
helped link present-day plants 
with their ancestors and 
showed that life on the Earth 
has a long, connected history. 
His work continues to inspire 
young scientists to explore 
how fossils reveal the story of 
our planet.
Meet a Scientist
Pause and Ponder
 7.	 Does the term ‘biodiversity’ 
relate only to the variety 
of organisms, or does it 
encompass other elements? 
 8.	 If you find a new organism 
in a pond, what features will 
you observe to classify it and 
why?
 9.	 Why do genetic studies 
provide deep information 
about living beings?
10.	 How can changes 
in climate affect the 
biodiversity?

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
248
Floating grasslands, locally known as phumdis are classified as one of the unique 
habitats in the world. It is located in the Loktak lake of the Keibul Lamjo National 
Park, in Manipur, India. These floating beds of soil have a variety of rooted 
vegetation growing with rich organic matter in it. Its thickness varies from a 
few centimetres to two metres. The habitat supports an association of unique 
vegetation and is home to an endangered variety of Sangai, the dancing deer, 
endemic to Manipur. The deer spends considerable time on phumdis restricted 
to this small area. This deer species was declared extinct in 1951. In 1953 the deer 
species was rediscovered, with the efforts of naturalists based on their unique 
characteristics of having hooves and elongated patterns. These characteristics 
of the deer species helped in 
their identification. Recently, 
the phumdis are degenerating 
and the Sangai deer is listed in 
the IUCN Red Data list. Habitat 
loss will significantly affect the 
Sangai population. Efforts for 
the conservation of phumdis 
and 
the 
Sangai 
deer 
are 
currently in progress. Provide 
your suggestions to save habitat 
and the Sangai deer.
Bridging Science and Society
At a Glance
	y Life on the Earth exists in many forms, from simple bacteria to 
complex animals. 
	y Scientists classify organisms based on the cell structure, number of 
cells, mode of nutrition and the organism’s ecological role.
	y Whittaker’s five kingdom classification system — Monera, Protista, 
Fungi, Plantae and Animalia — is a simple and useful system to 
understand diversity.
	y Kingdom Plantae is further divided into five classes — Thallophyta, 
Bryophyta, Pteridophyta, Gymnosperm and Angiosperm.
	y Kingdom Animalia is divided into non-chordata (invertebrates) 
and chordata (vertebrates) on the basis of formation of notochord. 
Non-chordata (Invertebrates) has been divided into phyla — Porifera, 
Cnidaria, Platyhelminthes, Nematoda, Annelida, Arthropoda, 
Mollusca, Echinodermata.
	y Protochordates show a transition from invertebrates to vertebrates 
as they possess notochord atleast once in their life. Vertebrates are 
further divided into groups — fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and 
mammals.
	y Classification is not just about naming organisms. It helps us 
understand the relationships among organisms, trace the history of 
life on the Earth and conserve the biodiversity.

249
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1.	 Meena and Hari observed an animal in their garden. Hari called it 
an insect while Meena said it was an earthworm. Choose the correct 
option which confirms that it is an insect.
(i)	 Bilateral symmetrical body
(ii)	 Body with jointed legs
(iii)	 Cylindrical body
(iv)	 Body with little segmentation
2.	 Sponges represent one of the simplest animal body plans. Their bodies 
lack true tissues and organs. Which feature of sponge cells supports its 
classification under the animal kingdom?
(i)	 Absence of mitochondria
(ii)	 Ability to photosynthesise
(iii)	 Presence of a cell membrane
(iv)	 Presence of a cell wall
3.	 Observe two different animals in your immediate environment. What 
features help you distinguish between them? How do these features 
help place them into different groups?
4.	 How would a scientist justify choosing cellular organisation as a more 
fundamental characteristic for the basis of classification rather than 
the presence of xylem and phloem?
5.	 You find an unlabelled slide of a single-celled organism that has a 
well-defined nucleus and multiple cilia. Which group would it most 
likely belong to? Give reasons.
6.	 How does the diversity of organisms contribute to the balance and 
stability of an ecosystem? 
7.	 If all unicellular organisms were grouped into a single kingdom, what 
problems would arise?
8.	 Viruses were studied in earlier classes. Why are they not placed in any 
of the five kingdoms? Give reasons.
9.	 If you were asked to revise the five kingdom classification, would 
you create a separate category for viruses or keep them outside the 
system? Justify your answer and explain what this indicates about 
the evolving nature of scientific classification.
10.	 Viruses contain genetic material like living organisms but lack cellular 
organisation. Which features prevent them from fitting into the 
five kingdom system? What does this tell us about the limitations of 
classification systems?
11.	 Both pteridophytes and bryophytes lack flowers and seeds, yet they 
are placed in different groups. Explain this classification using their 
key features. 

Textbook of Science for Grade 9
250
12.	 In the classification hierarchy, which group — class or genus — has 
fewer members but more features in common? Explain your answer.
13.	 A scientist discovers a new organism with the characteristic features 
of locomotion and autotrophic nutrition. Which character(s) would 
help the scientist identify the organism belonging to Protista according 
to the five kingdom classification?
14.	 A researcher identified a unicellular eukaryotic organism as fungi. 
What identification key would you suggest according to the five 
kingdom classification to keep a unicellular organism in the Kingdom 
Fungi?
15.	 During a long-term ecological study, students examined organisms 
collected from three different environments — a freshwater pond, 
damp soil near decaying logs and the digestive tract of animals. Instead 
of naming organisms directly, scientists recorded only structural, 
cellular and nutritional features as given in the table below.
Organisms
Key Observations
P
Microscopic; no true nucleus; rigid cell covering; survives high salinity and 
temperature
Q
Multicellular; filamentous body; cell wall present; no chlorophyll; grows on 
dead organic matter
R
Unicellular; true nucleus; contractile vacuole present; moves using flagella; 
shows photosynthesis in light but heterotrophic in the absence of light
S
Multicellular; well-differentiated tissues; backbone present; aquatic 
respiration during early life stage
T
Acellular; contains genetic material; remains inactive outside a host cell
	
	
The students realised that some organisms fit neatly into Whittaker’s 
five kingdom classification, while others challenged the very basis of 
this classification.
	
	
Based on the case study, answer the following questions —
(i)	 Identify one organism that clearly belongs to the Kingdom Fungi. 
State one observation that supports your answer.
(ii)	 Which organism would be placed in the Kingdom Monera? 
Mention one characteristic that justifies this placement.
(iii)	 Organisms R and Q are both eukaryotic, yet they are placed in 
different kingdoms. Analyse the criteria that separate them.
(iv)	 Explain why organism S cannot be classified using the mode of 
nutrition alone.
(v)	 Organism T does not fit into any of the five kingdoms. Which 
fundamental characteristic used in classification does it lack 
and what does this reveal about the limitations of classification 
systems?

251
Patterns in Life: Diversity and Classification
The Journey Beyond
	y Visit a nearby park or a water body. Observe the water body and its 
surroundings. Identify ten organisms and classify them into kingdoms.
	y Interview a gardener or a forest worker. Ask them how they identify 
species. Compare the traditional scientific methods of identification.
	y If you were studying the Pakke Tiger Reserve or any other bird sanctuary 
of your choice, how would you organise the information about the bird 
species?
	y Conduct a survey in a forest area near a village, identify edible and 
poisonous mushrooms with the help of indigenous knowledge of 
community resource person(s).
	y Collect and study the postal stamps of India and the world released 
over time on diversified flora and fauna. Based on your learning, make 
your own criteria and classify them. Organise a philately (collection of 
postage stamps) exhibition in your school and showcase your work in 
this exhibition.
	y Investigate an extinct species and analyse how its disappearance 
impacted the organisms that depend on it, and how this affected the 
ecological balance of the ecosystem.  
	y Study the diversity of farm animals used in different types of farming 
practices in various parts of the country.
	
What knowledge do you think scientists would come up with further and 
how would it affect the classification system?
The Quest Continues…
(vi)	 If classification were based only on habitat, which organisms 
might be incorrectly grouped together? Explain the scientific 
consequences of such a classification.
(vii)	 Imagine scientists discover a new organism that is multicellular, 
eukaryotic, lacks chlorophyll and absorbs nutrients from a host 
externally. Should it be placed under fungi or animalia? Justify 
your reasoning using classification criteria.
