Exploring Mixtures 
and their Separation
Chapter 
5
Have you ever wondered how sweet, white crystals of sugar are 
obtained from tall, green sugarcane plants? Or how do doctors 
detect diseases like malaria using just a few drops of blood? 
Many such everyday activities are made possible by techniques 
based on the fascinating science of separating mixtures.
You have learnt about mixtures and some simple 
methods to separate them. In this chapter, you will 
explore mixtures in greater depth, including their 
properties, behaviour and the various techniques used to 
separate them. From industrial processes like sugar production 
to life-saving medical tests, the separation of mixtures plays a 
crucial role in our daily lives.
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Think It Over
	y
Why do suspended 
particles settle in 
muddy water over 
time but not in milk?
	y
How is evaporation 
different from boiling? 
	y
Why do you see bright 
rays of sunlight when 
it passes through 
small gaps between 
the leaves of a dense 
tree?

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
73
5.1 How Can We Classify Mixtures?
You have learnt that a mixture of sugar and 
water has a uniform composition throughout. 
A well-stirred mixture of sugar and water 
is equally sweet in the first and the last sip. Such a 
mixture is called a homogeneous mixture (Fig. 5.1) or 
a solution. Other examples of homogeneous mixtures 
are vinegar (acetic acid in water), aerated drinks like 
soda (carbon dioxide in water), etc. A solution always 
remains homogeneous.
On the other hand, a stirred mixture of sand and water 
is not uniform. The sand particles are easily visible in 
the water and settle with time. Such a mixture is called a 
heterogeneous mixture (Fig. 5.2). Is the mixture of oil and 
water homogeneous or heterogeneous? Can you think of 
some other heterogeneous mixtures?
Activity 5.1: Let us experiment — Group activity 
Divide the class into three groups — A, B and C. Each group 
prepares a mixture in a colourless, transparent glass 
tumbler or a 100 mL beaker by following these steps: 
1.	 Group A: Add one spatula of common salt to 50 mL of 
water in a beaker and stir it well. 
Label it A. 
2.	 Group B: Add one spatula of chalk 
powder to 50 mL of water in a 
beaker and stir it well. Label it B.
3.	 Group C: Add a few drops of milk to 
50 mL of water in a beaker and stir 
it well. Label it C.
4.	 Are 
the 
particles 
visible 
in 
each 
mixture? 
Record 
your 
observations. 
5.	 Direct the light from a laser 
pointer 
through 
the 
beakers 
containing the mixtures (Fig. 5.3) 
and observe it from the side 
of the beaker in a direction 
perpendicular to the laser beam. 
Record your observations. 
Safety first: Do not look directly into the 
laser beam. It can cause irreversible eye 
damage.
6.	 Predict what you would observe 
in each of the beakers if you 
leave them undisturbed for a few 
minutes.
Fig. 5.1: Homogeneous mixture
Fig. 5.2: Heterogeneous mixture
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.3: Passing laser light through various mixtures (a) salt 
and water, (b) chalk powder and water, and (c) milk and water
A
B
C

Exploration|Grade 9
74
7.	 Set up a filtration apparatus and filter each mixture separately. Is 
there any residue left on the filter paper?
8.	 Based on your observations, do you think these are the same types of 
mixtures or are they different?
These are indeed different types of mixtures. How? Let us explore 
further!
5.2 Solutions 
You have learnt that solutions are homogeneous mixtures. You have also 
learnt that solutions are prepared when a solute (the substance that gets 
dissolved) is mixed with a solvent (the substance that dissolves the solute). 
In the mixture of sugar and water, sugar is the solute, and water is the 
solvent. In what proportion are a solute and a solvent present in a solution? 
Can these be expressed quantitatively?
5.2.1 Concentration of a solution 
You have learnt how Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) is prepared. We add 
specified amounts of salt and sugar to a fixed amount of water to prepare 
ORS. If we change the amount of salt or sugar added to the same volume 
of water, or change the volume of water for the specified amounts of salt 
and sugar, we will get a solution of salt and sugar in water, but that will 
not be ORS. In other words, we cannot freely add any amount of salt and 
sugar to a fixed amount of water to make ORS.
Let us take another example. When farmers spray pesticides on their 
crops, they must mix the right amount of pesticide with a fixed amount of 
water to prepare a solution. If they do not do so, what is likely to happen? 
Too little pesticide may not protect crops, while too much can damage 
crops, soil and the environment.
Can you think of other such examples?
The right proportion is always essential when preparing a 
solution.
The amount of solute dissolved in a given amount of 
solvent or solution is termed as the concentration of the 
solution. 
Understanding concentration is essential not only in science 
laboratories but also in everyday life, whether in medicine, 
agriculture, food, cosmetics, or even while making a simple 
cup of tea!
5.2.2 How do we express concentration?
Let us now explore the different ways to express the 
concentration of a solution, and understand where and why 
each method is more suitable.
Collect some commercial packaged products (Fig. 5.4) and 
note down the information given for each item.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 6
Note
Not all sugary 
drinks prepared 
at home or sold 
in the market 
are ORS.
Dilip 
Mahalanabis, 
an Indian 
paediatrician, 
first 
developed 
and 
implemented the treatment 
for dehydration caused 
by diseases, such as 
diarrhoea and cholera. He 
formulated the ORS that has 
revolutionised rehydration 
therapy. It has saved millions 
of lives after the World 
Health Organization (WHO) 
popularised it worldwide.
Meet a Scientist

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
75
The concentration of a solution can be expressed in several ways, a 
common one being the percentage which we are discussing here. You will 
learn about other methods in higher grades.
The three main ways to express the concentration of a solution in terms 
of percentage are given below.
A. Mass by mass percentage (% m/m or % w/w) 
This method is commonly used to express the concentration of 
homogeneous mixtures. It tells us how many grams of solute are present 
in 100 grams of the total solution. 
This can be expressed mathematically as,
×
Mass by mass percentage
Mass of solution
Mass of solute
100
=
                  (5.1)
This method of expressing concentration is also used for heterogeneous 
mixtures, such as milk powder (Fig. 5.4a) and spice mixtures. It is also used 
to label the composition of packaged foods, showing how much salt, sugar, 
or protein is present in them.
Example 5.1: If 10 g of salt is dissolved in 90 g of water, calculate the mass 
by mass percentage of the solution formed.
Answer: Mass of salt (solute) = 10 g
Mass of water (solvent) = 90 g
Total mass of solution = Mass of solute + Mass of solvent
	
= 10 g + 90 g = 100 g
×
Mass by mass percentage
Mass of solution
Mass of solute
100
=
	
            
×
%
/
g
g
m m
100
10
100
10
=
=
B. Mass by volume percentage (% m/v or % w/v) 
This method is used where measuring the volume of a liquid is easier 
than weighing it, for example, in medicines and laboratories. A common 
example is 5% glucose solution (Fig. 5.4b). It tells us how many grams of the 
solute is present in 100 millilitres of the solution.
Mathematically,
×
Mass by volume percentage
Volume of solution
Mass of solute
100
=
                  (5.2) 
Example 5.2: If 5 g of glucose is dissolved in water to make 100 mL of 
solution, calculate its concentration in mass by volume percentage.
Answer: Mass of glucose (solute) = 5 g
Volume of solution = 100 mL
×
Mass by volume percentage
Volume of solution
Mass of solute
100
=
	
×
%
/
mL
g
m v
100
5
100
5
=
=
Next 
Level 
Up
(a)
(c)
Fig. 5.4: Composition 
of some commercial 
packaged products 
(a) milk powder, 
(b) glucose solution, and 
(c) vinegar
(b)

Exploration|Grade 9
76
C. Volume by volume percentage (% v/v) 
This method is used when two miscible liquids are mixed, 
for example, in perfumes, cosmetics and vinegar (Fig. 5.4c). 
The volume by volume percentage (% v/v) tells us how many 
millilitres of the solute is present in 100 millilitres of the solution.
Mathematically,
×
Volume by volume percentage
Volume of solution
Volume of solute
100
=
 (5.3)
Example 5.3: If 1 mL of a liquid pesticide is mixed with a 
sufficient amount of water to form 100 mL of a pesticide spray 
for rice crop, calculate its volume by volume percentage.
Answer: Volume of pesticide (solute) = 1 mL
Total volume of solution = 100 mL
Volume by volume percentage 
	
	
	
	
×
Volume of solution
Volume of solute
100
=
	
×
% /
mL
mL
v v
100
1
100
1
=
=
Note
Commonly used unit in industries is weight by weight percentage (% w/w), as weight and mass are 
generally used interchangeably. Numerically, both % m/m and % w/w are equal to each other.
1.	 A common talcum powder contains 4 % m/m zinc oxide, which acts as an antiseptic. How 
much zinc oxide is present in 300 g of the talcum powder?
2.	 Your mother gives you a bottle of orange juice concentrate to mix with water and serve it to 
your visiting friends. She asks you to mix two tablespoons of the concentrate with water in a 
glass tumbler. If each tablespoon measures 15 mL and you make 150 mL of juice per person, 
what is the % v/v of orange juice concentrate in the mixture you prepared?
3.	 Vinegar, used as a food preservative and additive, contains 5 % v/v acetic acid. Glacial acetic 
acid is a liquid, i.e., 100% acetic acid. If you want to make vinegar from glacial acetic acid, how 
would you proceed? 
Pause and Ponder
5.2.3 Solubility of substances
You have learnt that the maximum amount of solute that dissolves in a 
fixed quantity of the solvent (100 mL or 100 g) is called its solubility at a 
given temperature. A solution that cannot dissolve any more solute at that 
temperature is called a saturated solution. Why do we mention the 
temperature? This is because the solubility of a solid solute in a liquid 
solvent generally increases with temperature. On the other hand, in the 
case of gases dissolved in liquids, their solubility generally decreases with 
an increase in temperature. Solubility is an important property used to 
separate substances from mixtures. Let us explore it further! 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Threads of 
Curiosity
A saline drip in hospitals 
is usually 0.9 % m/v 
sodium 
chloride 
(common 
salt) in 
water. That 
means 0.9 g 
of salt in 
100 mL of 
solution 
(Fig. 5.5). 
0.9% saline 
solution 
is safe for 
blood and 
replaces lost 
fluids in the 
body.
Fig. 5.5: Saline 
solution

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
77
Activity 5.2: Let us represent solubility graphically
Consider water as the solvent, and compounds ‘A’ and ‘B’ as the solutes. Each 
substance has a different solubility. A graph of solubility versus temperature 
is called a solubility curve. The solubility curves for ‘A’ and ‘B’ as solutes 
are shown in Fig. 5.6. The x-axis shows temperature (°C), whereas the y-axis 
indicates the solubility of the solute in grams per 100 g of water. 
Fig. 5.6: Solubility curves of compounds ‘A’ and ‘B’ in water
0
400
y
x
350
300
250
241
200
100
150
50
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Temperature (°C)
Solubility (g per 100 g water)
Compound ‘A’
Compound ‘B’
287
Based on the information from the above graph, predict which of the 
two compounds, ‘A’ or ‘B’, will dissolve more in a given amount of water at 
a given temperature? 
Observe Fig. 5.6 and fill in the blanks of the following statements:
(i)	 The solubility of compound ‘A’ in water at 20 °C is ______________ (less 
than/more than/similar to) its solubility at 60 °C.
(ii)	 The solubility of compound ‘B’ at 20 °C is ____________ (less than/
more than/similar to) its solubility at 60 °C. 
(iii)	 The 
solubility 
of _____________ increases 
more 
than 
that 
of ______________ with an increase in the temperature.
What do you think will happen if you make a saturated solution at a 
higher temperature and cool it slowly? Let us find out!
5.3 Methods of Separation of Homogeneous Mixtures
5.3.1 Crystallization
You have learnt to prepare a saturated solution. If you take a saturated 
solution of compound ‘B’ in water at 60 °C, prepared by dissolving 287 g 
of compound ‘B’ in 100 g of water, what will happen if you gradually cool 
it to 40 °C? As per Fig. 5.6, the solubility of compound ‘B’ is 241 g per 100 g 
of water at 40 °C. It implies that only 241 g of compound ‘B’ can remain 
in the solution and the rest of it will separate out as a pure solid, often 
as crystals. A crystal is a solid that is made up of particles arranged in a 
regular geometric pattern. 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9

Exploration|Grade 9
78
You might have observed many types of crystals in everyday life, such 
as rock salt crystals (Fig. 5.7a) or sugar crystals (Fig. 5.7b) that grow while 
making candy sugar (called mishri in Hindi). Snowflakes are also crystals, 
formed when water vapour freezes in the air. Even frost on windows is 
formed when water vapour turns into ice crystals (Fig. 5.7c). This is how 
crystals form naturally.
In laboratories, the process of forming crystals from a saturated solution 
is called crystallization. This method can be used for the separation of 
two solids, in which one of the compounds is present in small quantity 
and both are soluble in the same solvent. This method can also be used 
for purification of solids. The principle of purification by crystallization 
is based on the differences in the solubility of a substance at different 
temperatures. 
Try creating your own crystals.
Activity 5.3: Let us prepare 
1.	 Collect a sample of copper sulfate (blue vitriol). If 
copper sulfate is unavailable, you can use common 
salt as an alternative.
Safety first: Copper sulfate is toxic. Perform the experiment under adult 
supervision and do not touch it with your bare hands.
2.	 Take 1 g of copper sulfate and place 
it in a 100 mL beaker. Add 25 mL of 
water to the beaker and add a drop 
of dilute sulfuric acid. Gently heat 
the mixture in a water bath while 
stirring constantly. Sulfuric acid 
helps in making pure crystals by 
preventing unwanted reactions. 
Safety first: It is advised that the teacher 
should add a drop of sulfuric acid. Handle 
sulfuric acid very carefully! 
3.	 Gradually, 
add 
more 
copper 
sulfate until the solution becomes 
saturated (Fig. 5.8a).
4.	 Filter the hot solution to remove 
insoluble impurities (Fig. 5.8b). 
Collect it in a clean beaker and 
cover it with a watch glass.
5.	 Allow the solution to cool slowly 
without disturbing it (Fig. 5.8c). It 
gives enough time to the particles 
in the solution to come together, 
resulting in the formation of 
larger, shiny, well-shaped and 
blue-coloured crystals. 
6.	 Filter the crystals, rinse them with 
cold water and allow them to dry 
on a watch glass (Fig. 5.8d).
Note
Sulfuric acid is 
required for the 
crystallization of 
only some salts.
(a) Preparing the saturated 
solution
(b) Filtering the hot saturated 
solution
(c) Cooling down the filtrate 
(d) Crystals of copper sulfate
Fig. 5.8: Steps involved in the process of crystallization
Glass rod
Glass rod
Burner
Water 
bath
Conical 
funnel
Watch 
glass
Laboratory 
stand
Copper 
sulfate 
crystals
Tripod 
stand
Beaker
Beaker
Filtrate
Beaker
Copper 
sulfate 
solution
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5.7: Crystals of 
(a) rock salt, 
(b) candy sugar, and 
(c) frost
Watch 
glass

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
79
You may also try:
1.	 Place 1 – 2 mL of the saturated copper sulfate solution on a small glass 
plate or a lamination sheet.
2.	 Leave it for some time. What do you observe? 
Did you get crystals? If yes, is this a good way to experiment? Explain.  
Crystallization is a common technique for separating pure substances 
(crystals) from homogeneous mixtures. When new compounds are prepared, 
they are often accompanied by unwanted impurities. Crystallization helps 
to separate the desired pure substance from the undesired impurities.
If a hot, saturated solution of copper sulfate is cooled rapidly in ice-cold water, smaller and less 
well-formed crystals will form than if it is cooled slowly at room temperature. How would you 
design and perform an experiment to test this hypothesis?
Hint: Prepare a hot saturated solution of copper sulfate and divide it into two equal parts. 
Think as a Scientist
4.	 Refer to the solubility curves given in Activity 5.2. If equal masses of hot, saturated solutions 
of compounds ‘A’ and ‘B’ are cooled from 80 °C to 60 °C, which solution is likely to deposit 
more solid? 
5.	 Will there be any change in the size of common salt crystals if the rate of evaporation is 
increased or decreased? Explain.
Pause and Ponder
Activity 5.4: Let us describe a process
Observe Fig. 5.9, it shows how salt crystals are obtained from seawater. 
Can you describe the process in your own words?
Seawater
Saturated 
solution
Salt crystals
Fig. 5.9: Steps followed in the salt manufacturing process 
Ready to Go Beyond 
(a)
(b)
Have you visited a place where large 
crystal deposits can be observed in nature? 
Such crystals can be found in various 
locations, including mines, caves and even 
within the Earth’s crust. One such example 
is the Mawsmai Cave (Fig. 5.10a) in Sohra 
(Cherrapunji), known for its fascinating 
natural formations. Quartz (Fig. 5.10b) is 
also one of the beautiful crystals found in 
nature.
Fig. 5.10: Naturally occurring crystals (a) in caves and (b) quartz

Exploration|Grade 9
80
When we allow a solvent to evaporate to get a solute, 
such as salt from a salt solution, the solvent disappears. 
However, we may also want to recover the solvent. What 
should we do then? 
While experimenting in the laboratory, a student 
accidentally mixed acetone and water, two miscible 
liquids. How can we separate the two miscible liquids? Is it 
possible to separate the mixture of two miscible liquids by 
evaporation and obtain both the liquids? 
5.3.2 Distillation
A homogeneous mixture of two miscible liquids can be 
separated by heating the mixture until the liquid with 
the lower boiling point vaporises. The vapour is then 
cooled, turning back into liquid (Fig. 5.11). This process 
is known as distillation. It allows the recovery of the 
solvent or the separation of liquids that differ in boiling 
point by at least about 25 °C. This method can also be 
used to separate a liquid from a solution containing 
dissolved solids.
During the process, vapours of the lower-boiling liquid 
are passed through a condenser where they are cooled, 
usually by circulating water or air and condensed as 
a pure liquid. The pure liquid is collected in a separate 
vessel, while the solid or other liquid from the mixture 
remains in the distillation flask. A distillation set-up is 
shown in Fig. 5.12.
Fig. 5.12: Distillation set-up
Thermometer
Water outlet
Water 
condenser
Water inlet
Conical flask
Acetone
Distillation flask
Mixture of acetone and water
Tripod stand
Wire gauze
Burner
Laboratory 
stand
Liquid
Vapour
Liquid
(Distillate)
Heating
Cooling
Fig. 5.11: Distillation process
India’s Scientific 
Contributions
Crystallization of salt was 
an ancient process used 
by the local communities 
of the coastal areas in 
India. The panga salt 
was obtained by boiling 
concentrated sea brines, 
while the evaporation 
of sea water produced 
the karkatch salt. Salt 
crystals of different sizes 
were produced by these 
methods.

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
81
A mixture of acetone and water can be separated by distillation because 
their boiling points differ sufficiently. Acetone boils at about 56 °C and 
water boils at 100 °C. A large difference in boiling points allows one liquid 
to vaporise before the vapours of the other liquid are formed in significant 
amount. 
The process of distillation has been used for a long time for 
various purposes, including extraction of fragrances from 
flowers to make perfumes.
You must have noticed the pleasant earthy smell that 
rises from the ground after the first rain. In Kannauj, a 
town in Uttar Pradesh known as the perfume capital of 
India, this beautiful fragrance is captured and turned into 
a natural perfume called Mitti ka Ittar (earthy fragrance). 
This perfume is made using a traditional distillation method 
known as the Deg-Bhapka method (Fig. 5.13), which has 
been passed down through generations in Kannauj. It is 
in great demand, both in India and around the world. The 
Fragrance and Flavour Development Centre in Kannauj 
has facilities for separating flavour and fragrance components from flowers, leaves and other parts 
of plants. It also supports farmers in cultivating fragrance-producing plants and offers expertise to 
those looking to establish their own perfume businesses.
India’s Scientific Contributions
Fig. 5.13: Deg-Bhapka method
Ready to Go Beyond
Fig. 5.14: (a) Petroleum refinery, and (b) products of fractional distillation of crude petroleum 
(a)
A petroleum refinery (Fig. 5.14a) is an industrial unit where crude oil is processed to obtain 
various useful petroleum products. Petroleum products are mixtures of useful gases and liquids, 
such as petroleum gas, petrol, kerosene, diesel, etc. Crude 
petroleum is extracted from the Earth’s crust and separated 
into these different fractions using the process of fractional 
distillation (Fig. 5.14b). Fractional distillation is the process 
of separating components of a mixture with relatively 
small differences (less than 25 °C) in their boiling points. 
The gaseous fraction is filled in steel cylinders under high 
pressure, where it gets liquefied. It is used as domestic fuel 
in the form of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG).
(b)
Bitumen
Diesel
Petrol
Petroleum gas
Lubricating oil
Aviation fuel 
(Kerosene)
Furnace
Crude 
oil

Exploration|Grade 9
82
5.3.3 Paper Chromatography
Have you ever observed what happens when a drop of water 
falls on something written with a sketch pen on a paper? You 
may have noticed that the colour spreads. If the sketch pen is 
black, different colours might spread out. If you have not noticed 
this before, try it now!
Activity 5.5: Let us investigate
1.	 Take a 3 cm wide strip of chromatographic paper and draw 
a straight, horizontal line, 2 cm from the bottom of the 
paper with a pencil (Fig. 5.15a). Alternatively, you can use a 
strip of filter paper.
2.	 Mark a spot with a black sketch pen at the centre of the line 
(Fig. 5.15b). 
3.	 Take enough water to make a thin 
layer at the bottom of a gas jar, a 
measuring cylinder, or a beaker.
4.	 Place the paper strip with the ink 
spot vertically into the container, 
so that its lower end dips into the 
water. The water level should 
be below the spot, as shown in 
Fig. 5.15c.
5.	 Observe the paper as the water rises 
through the paper. What do you 
notice?
6.	 As the water rises, the ink starts to 
separate into different colour spots. 
What can you infer from this? 
This method of separating the components of a mixture is known as 
paper chromatography. It uses differences in the interactions of the 
components with the solvent and the paper to separate them. The liquid 
carries the substances up the paper, separating them based on how fast 
they move. You can also try this with green food colour instead of black ink 
and use a 2 % m/v salt solution as the solvent.
Similarly, you can separate different pigments present in the green 
extract of spinach leaves or coloured pigments from the flower petals. Will 
water work as a solvent in every case? In some cases, you may need to use 
a different solvent, such as alcohol or a mixture of solvents.
6.	 State whether the following statements are True or False. Also, correct the False statements.
(i)	 Salt can be separated from a salt solution by evaporation or distillation.
(ii)	 Distillation can be used for separation of two liquids even when these have the same 
boiling point.
(iii)	 In paper chromatography, the solvent level should be above the sample spot at the 
beginning of the experiment.
(iv)	 Evaporation and crystallization are the same processes.
Pause and Ponder
Threads of 
Curiosity
The word ‘chromatography’ 
comes from the Greek 
words chroma, meaning 
‘colour’ and graphein, 
meaning ‘to write’. It 
actually means ‘writing 
with colour’ because it 
was first used to separate 
coloured substances like 
dyes and inks.
Fig. 5.15: Paper chromatography
(a)
(c)
Chromatographic
paper
Line drawn 
with pencil
Watch 
glass
Gas jar
Water
(b)
Ink 
spot

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
83
5.4  How Can We Separate the Components of 
Heterogeneous Mixtures?
5.4.1 Separation of two immiscible liquids
You have learnt about non-uniform mixtures. Have you noticed what 
happens when water falls into a container that has oil? The oil and water 
form separate layers. They do not mix and are called immiscible liquids. 
Similarly, sand and water do not mix, nor do iron filings and sulfur. These 
are examples of heterogeneous mixtures.
How can you separate the components of a mixture of two immiscible 
liquids? 
Let us try to separate mustard oil from water. 
Activity 5.6: Let us separate
1.	 Pour a mixture of 5 mL mustard oil and 
20 mL water into a 50 mL separating 
funnel. 
2.	 Let it stand undisturbed. What do you 
observe?
3.	 You will see the formation of two separate 
layers of mustard oil and water (Fig. 5.16). 
The yellow-coloured mustard oil forms the 
upper layer and water forms the lower 
layer. Can you explain why?
4.	 Open the stopcock of the separating funnel 
slowly to collect the lower layer of water 
carefully into a container.
5.	 Close the stopcock when the water is almost 
fully drained.
6.	 Collect the next small portion that may 
contain both liquids and discard it.
7.	 Collect the layer of oil separately by opening the stopcock again.
You now have two separate liquids.
Can you think of any heterogeneous mixtures with a gas as 
one of the components? 
Gas particles are free to move in all directions, so they mix 
easily and uniformly with other gases. Hence, most mixtures of 
gases are homogeneous, such as a mixture of hydrogen and 
oxygen, which is used as a rocket fuel. On the other hand, smoke 
(solid particles suspended in air), fog (tiny liquid water droplets 
present in air) and dust in the air are some heterogeneous 
mixtures with gas as one of the components.
Most of the solid-solid mixtures are heterogeneous. You 
can use a property of one of the solids to separate the mixture. 
You have learnt how to separate iron nails from sawdust 
using a magnet. Now, let us explore another technique to 
separate solid-solid mixtures.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Grade 6
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Separating funnel
Water
Conical flask
Mustard oil
Fig. 5.16: Separation of immiscible liquids
Laboratory stand
Glass stopper
Stopcock
What if …
two immiscible liquids 
of the same density are 
mixed in a separating 
funnel, how will the 
layers form?

Exploration|Grade 9
84
5.4.2 Sublimation 
Activity 5.7: Let us explore
1.	 Take a spatula full of the mixture containing crushed camphor and 
sand. Put it into a clean and dry china dish. Place it on the tripod stand 
using a wire gauze.
2.	 Take a clean and dry glass funnel. Plug its 
nozzle with cotton.
3.	 Keep this funnel inverted on the china dish 
and set up the apparatus as shown in Fig. 5.17. 
4.	 Light the burner and place it under the wire 
gauze.
5.	 Heat the china dish gently for a few minutes.
6.	 Observe the inner wall of the funnel carefully. 
Do you notice any solid deposits?
7.	 You may find white, solid camphor deposits 
on the inner wall of the funnel while sand 
remains in the china dish. 
Camphor, on heating (below its melting point), 
changes directly from the solid state to the vapour 
state without passing through the liquid state, this 
process is called sublimation. On cooling, vapours 
condense back into a solid without becoming a 
liquid, this is called deposition. Hence, camphor sublimes and separates 
from sand because sand does not sublime on heating. 
You can also perform this activity using any other sublimable substance, 
such as naphthalene, in place of camphor. 
Similarly, solid carbon dioxide, known as dry ice which is used for ice 
cream storage, also undergoes sublimation. Can you think of any other 
mixtures where sublimation can be used to separate the components?
Is it possible to dissolve one metal in another?
Metals do not dissolve into each other at room temperature. However, 
when metals are melted at high temperatures, they can be mixed to form a 
solution. When such a hot mixture of two or more metals cools, it solidifies 
into a new material that appears to be a single metal. A homogeneous 
mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-metal, is called an 
alloy. Physical methods cannot separate the components of an alloy. Alloys 
are generally prepared to produce materials that are stronger, 
more rigid, or more corrosion-resistant. Common examples 
of alloys include brass — a mixture of approximately 80% 
copper and 20% zinc; bronze — a mixture of approximately 
80% copper and 20% tin; stainless steel — usually a mixture 
of iron and other elements, such as carbon (about 0.03 – 0.8%), 
chromium (16 – 18%), nickel (10.0 –14.0%) and molybdenum 
(2.0 – 3.0%).
Cotton plug
Glass funnel
China dish containing 
mixture of camphor and 
sand
Wire gauze
Tripod stand
Burner
Fig. 5.17: Sublimation of camphor
Pause and Ponder
7.	 Why do immiscible liquids 
form two separate layers 
in a separating funnel?
8.	 Is sublimation different 
from evaporation? Justify.

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
85
5.4.3 Suspensions
Let us look closely at the container shown in Fig. 5.2. No matter how well 
you stir, the sand particles can be seen clearly, unlike in a solution, where 
the solute particles are not visible. Such heterogeneous mixtures in which 
the solid particles (sand) do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout 
the bulk of the medium (water) are called suspensions. In the case of a 
suspension, the particles of the undissolved substance are larger in size 
than the particles present in the solution. Particles of a suspension are 
visible to the naked eye. Some other examples of suspension are sawdust 
suspended in water and tea leaves in water.
How can we separate mud from water?
If you leave a container of muddy water undisturbed, the heavier mud 
particles settle at the bottom and the water may still appear cloudy. You can 
filter the muddy water through a cotton cloth or filter paper. While some 
larger particles will be removed, the water often remains cloudy. This shows 
that filtration is not always enough to separate tiny particles. If the muddy 
water is still not clear even after keeping for some time, how can it be cleaned? 
In such cases, we use techniques, such as centrifugation and/or coagulation. 
Let us explore these processes!
A. Centrifugation
Let us understand this by playing a game. Choose a partner. 
Then, cross your arms and hold each other’s hands as shown 
in  Fig. 5.18. Now spin around together. Do you feel as if you 
are being pulled outwards? A similar force helps to separate 
a mixture in a tube by centrifugation. This process involves 
spinning a mixture in a tube at a high speed (Fig. 5.19). During 
centrifugation, the tubes become horizontal and the centrifugal 
force (outward force acting on a body moving in circular 
motion) causes the heavier particles to move outwards, where 
they settle at the bottom of the tube, while the lighter liquid 
remains at the top.
Fig. 5.19: Centrifugation machine (a) outer view and (b) inner view
(a)
(b)
Centrifugation is widely used in laboratories to separate the 
components of blood, such as red blood cells and plasma, and in many 
chemical industries.
Threads of 
Curiosity
The spinning game is a folk 
dance 
called 
phugadi 
in 
Marathi and kikli in Punjabi. 
What is this called in your 
local language?
Fig. 5.18: A spinning game   

Exploration|Grade 9
86
The Paperfuge
Centrifugation is usually done using an electric 
machine but by applying ideas from a common 
toy, a simple hand-powered device called a 
paperfuge (Fig. 5.20) can perform the same process 
without electricity. By spinning the blood samples 
at a very high speed, the paperfuge separates 
heavier components from lighter ones, just like 
a laboratory centrifuge. This low-cost tool can 
help detect diseases like malaria and anaemia in 
remote areas. Find out more about such simple 
technological inventions that improve access to 
medical care in remote places.
Bridging Science and Society
Tape
 Fig. 5.20: Paperfuge 
Blood sample
String
Handle
Cardboard disc
Activity 5.8: Let us make a model
Make your own centrifuge with a cardboard 
disc and thick thread. You will be able to see 
how the heavier particles move outwards. It 
is a fun and hands-on way to understand the 
science behind separation. Which mixture 
would you like to separate using this mini 
centrifuge?
B. Coagulation
Powdered alum (fitkari) can be added to a 
beaker containing muddy water (Fig. 5.21a). 
Alum is a white crystalline chemical 
substance often used in water purification. 
The alum causes the fine suspended 
particles to clump together. This process 
is called coagulation and the alum is said 
to act as a coagulant (Fig. 5.21b). These 
larger clumps thus formed, settle by gravity 
(sedimentation), as shown in Fig. 5.21c and 
can be separated from water by decantation 
or filtration.
Can you think of any other coagulation 
processes used in everyday life?
The formation of cheese (paneer) from milk also involves coagulation, 
in which acid (lemon juice or vinegar) is used as a coagulant. It causes the 
coagulation of milk proteins, forming cheese.
5.4.4 Colloids
If the components of blood can be separated by centrifugation and the 
blood coagulates, is it a suspension? However, we cannot see blood cells 
with the naked eye. Is it a solution?
Blood is neither a solution nor a true suspension. It is a colloid. Some 
other examples of colloids are milk, tomato sauce and ice cream.
Fig. 5.21: Process of coagulation
(c) Impurities settle at the bottom
(a) Adding powdered 
alum to suspended 
impurities in water
Powdered 
alum
(b) Alum coagulates 
the suspended 
impurities
Muddy 
water
Settled impurities  

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
87
Donate Blood 
Bridging Science and Society
Plasma
Platelets and 
white blood cells
Blood sample
Test tube stand
Fig. 5.22: Components of blood (a) before 
centrifugation and (b) after centrifugation 
Red blood cells
Donating blood saves lives. People in emergencies, 
during surgeries, or with serious illnesses may need a 
blood transfusion, which is the transfer of blood from a 
healthy person to a patient.
Donated blood is tested and when the blood group 
is identified, it is separated into its components, such as 
plasma, platelets, white and red blood cells (Fig. 5.22). 
These are stored safely in blood banks and supplied 
when required. In Chapter 3, Tissues in Action, you 
have learnt that blood connects different parts of the 
body by transporting nutrients, gases and hormones.
The body replaces the donated blood naturally 
within a few weeks, making blood donation safe and 
helpful.
Do you know your blood group? Find out!
(a)
(b)
Let us try to understand what colloids are. 
How are they different from solutions and 
suspensions? Can you think of some other 
substances that could be colloids?
Solutions, 
suspensions 
and 
colloids 
(Fig. 5.23) differ mainly in the size of the 
dissolved or the suspended particles. The 
particle size of a solute is the smallest (less 
than 1 nm diameter) in a solution. Colloids 
have larger particles (1 – 1000 nm), while 
suspensions have much larger particles (more 
than 1000 nm in diameter). 
Unlike suspension, the particles in a colloid do not settle over time from 
the mixture. They are uniformly dispersed throughout the mixture as in 
a solution. 
5.5 Tyndall Effect
Let us go back to Activity 5.1. What happened to the thin beam of laser 
light when it was passed through the beakers containing the mixtures? 
You might have observed that the path of the light beam was not visible 
in solution A. The particles in suspension B scattered (spread) the beam 
of light making its path visible. In mixture C too, the path of light was 
visible, indicating that the particles scattered the light, though the mixture 
appeared homogeneous. 
Have you ever observed light scattering by particles in your 
surroundings? The scattering of light by particles is known as the Tyndall 
effect. It is called so because it was first explained by the scientist John 
Tyndall, who studied the scattering of light by particles.
This effect can also be observed when a fine beam of light enters a dark 
room through a small hole. This happens because light gets scattered by 
Fig. 5.23: (a) Solution, (b) suspension, and (c) colloid
(a)
(b)
(c)

Exploration|Grade 9
88
the dust and smoke particles in the air. You might have also 
observed this phenomenon in the floodlights in a sports 
stadium (Fig. 5.24). Think of some more examples!
Scattering of light occurs when it passes through a 
colloid or a suspension but not when it passes through a 
transparent solution.
The components of a colloid are called the dispersed 
phase and the dispersion medium. The solute-like component 
or the dispersed particles, in a colloid form the dispersed 
phase and the component in which the dispersed phase is 
suspended is known as the dispersion medium.
Some common colloids we encounter in our daily lives have both the dispersed phase and the 
dispersion medium as liquids. These are called emulsions. Emulsions containing oil and water are 
further classified as oil-in-water or water-in-oil, depending on the nature of the dispersed phase 
and the dispersion medium. Milk and vanishing creams are common examples of oil-in-water 
emulsions, whereas butter, body lotions, cold cream, etc., are examples of water-in-oil emulsions. 
Some medicines are prepared as emulsions to disperse them in water and make them easily 
palatable. This also reduces the greasy feeling of the liquid medicine.
The presence of emulsifying agents stabilises emulsions. For example, proteins in milk and 
butter act as emulsifying agents. 
You can make an emulsion by thoroughly mixing and shaking a few drops of cooking oil with 
water containing a few drops of soap solution.   
Threads of Curiosity
	 9.	 Clouds are made up of tiny water droplets or ice crystals floating in the air. Based on what you 
know about solutions, suspensions and colloids, what type of mixture do you think clouds are 
and why?
	 10.	 Why do cities with a lot of smoke and dust in the air often look hazy?
Pause and Ponder
Activity 5.9: Complete Table 5.1 and review what you have learnt about 
solutions, suspensions and colloids.
Table 5.1: Properties of different types of mixtures
S. No.
Property
Solution
Suspension
Colloid
1.
Nature (homogeneous/heterogeneous)
2.
Particle size
3.
Visibility
4.
Separation by filtration
5.
Settling
6.
Tyndall effect
Fig. 5.24: Demonstration of Tyndall effect in 
a sports stadium

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
89
We use various properties, such as size, density and solubility to separate 
mixtures. However, separation is not always simple. Imagine trying to 
separate all the ingredients in a lemonade once they have been mixed. Can 
you do it? 
Do you know that separation happens in nature and in our bodies, 
too? For example, our kidneys remove waste from our blood. Today, we 
face bigger challenges like cleaning oceans and rivers by removing plastic 
waste. It is also essential to treat sewage water before releasing it into the 
environment. Sewage treatment involves steps, such as sedimentation, 
coagulation and filtration. Clean water obtained in this way can be reused 
for flushing toilets or watering plants.
Another important task is sorting or segregating the waste at home. Dry 
waste, such as plastic, paper, glass and metal can be recycled, while wet 
waste like food scraps, vegetable peels, etc., can be composted. Researchers 
are also finding ways to recover valuable materials, such as lithium from 
old batteries used in mobile phones and laptops.
By improving the methods for separating waste and recycling materials, 
you can help make the world cleaner, healthier and more sustainable.
	y Mixtures are classified as homogeneous or heterogeneous and also 
as solutions, suspensions, or colloids.
	y Separation of mixtures is a crucial process for obtaining pure 
substances. 
	y Crystallization is a technique used to get a pure solid from its 
saturated solution.
	y Distillation is used to separate two miscible liquids with a 
minimum difference of 25 °C in boiling points. It can also be used 
to obtain a liquid from a mixture of a liquid and a solid.
	y Paper chromatography can be used to separate compounds by 
taking advantage of differences in their rates of movement on the 
paper.
	y A separating funnel is used to separate two immiscible liquids 
based on their different densities. 
	y The transition of a solid directly into a vapour (below its melting 
point) without passing through the liquid state is called sublimation. 
The process when the vapour cools and changes back into a solid 
without becoming a liquid is called deposition.
	y Centrifugation uses rapid spinning to separate heavier solid 
particles from a solid-liquid mixture.
	y Coagulation involves the addition of a substance, called a coagulant, 
to make smaller particles clump together and settle down in a 
heterogeneous mixture of solids and liquids.
	y The dispersed particles in a colloid or suspension scatter light, 
which is known as the Tyndall effect.
At a Glance 

Exploration|Grade 9
90
1.	 Which of the following mixtures are correctly classified as 
homogeneous (Hm) and heterogeneous (Ht)? Choose the correct 
option.
(i)	 Air — Hm, Milk — Ht, Sugar solution — Hm, Smoke — Hm
(ii)	 Brass — Ht, Fog — Ht, Vinegar — Ht, Muddy water — Hm
(iii)	 Copper sulfate solution — Hm, Salt solution — Hm, Milk — Hm, 
Bronze — Hm
(iv)	 Muddy water — Ht, Milk — Ht, Blood — Ht, Brass — Hm
2.	 Choose the correct options, and explain the reason for the correct and 
incorrect options.
	
Which among the following mixtures show the Tyndall Effect? 
A mixture of:
(a)	 air and dust particles
(b)	 copper sulfate and water
(c)	 starch and water
(d)	 acetone and water
	
	 (i) a and b	
(ii) b and d	
(iii) a and c	
(iv) c and d 
3.	 A mixture can be categorised as a solution, a suspension, or a colloid, 
each possessing distinct properties. Utilise the words or phrases 
provided in the box to fill in the Table 5.2. Words and phrases may be 
used more than once.
Words and Phrases 
Large-sized particles; Particles remain evenly distributed; Small-sized particles 
(less than 1 nm diameter); Moderate-sized particles (1 – 1000 nm); Settles down 
when left undisturbed (more than 1000 nm in diameter); Does not settle down; 
Scatters light; Separates by filtration; Transparent; Salt solution; Milk; Sand in 
water; Smoke; Heterogeneous mixture; Cannot be separated by filtration; Mud; 
Butter; Brass.  
Complete the Table 5.2.
Table 5.2
Solution
Suspension
Colloid
Properties
__________________________
__________________________
Properties
__________________________
__________________________
Properties
__________________________
__________________________
Examples
__________________________
__________________________
Examples
__________________________
__________________________
Examples
__________________________
__________________________
Revise, Reflect, Refine

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
91
4.	 Solve the following problems:
(i)	 A cake recipe uses dry ingredients, namely 75 g of sugar for 
420 g of all-purpose flour and 5 g of sodium hydrogencarbonate. 
Express the concentration of each component in the mixture using 
an appropriate method.
(ii)	 A brass alloy contains 70% copper by mass. Calculate the quantities 
of copper and zinc present in 120 g of brass. 
5.	 The label on a cooking oil pack says one litre (910 g). If this oil is mixed 
with water, will it form a separate layer? If so, which substance will be 
on top? How will you separate the two layers? Also, draw the diagram 
of the apparatus used.
6.	 Assertion (A): Solutions do not exhibit the Tyndall effect.
	
Reason (R): The particles in solutions are larger than 100 nm, so they 
cannot scatter light.
	
Choose the correct option:
(i)	 Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
(ii)	 Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
(iii)	 A is true, but R is false.
(iv)	 A is false, but R is true.
7.	 How would you separate the mixtures given in Table 5.3? Mention the 
reason for choosing your method. If a mixture cannot be separated, 
explain why.
Table 5.3
Mixture
Method of separation
Reason for selection
Mud from muddy water
Plasma from other components 
in the blood sample 
Naphthalene and sand
Chalk powder and common 
salt
Common salt and water 
Oil from water 
Pigments of the flower
8.	 Two miscible liquids, A and B, are present in a mixture. The boiling 
point of A is 60 °C and the boiling point of B is 90 °C. Suggest a method 
to separate them. Also, draw a labelled diagram of the method 
suggested.
9.	 Compare evaporation, crystallization and distillation. In which 
situation, would you prefer each of these over the others?
10.	 Blood is an example of a colloidal mixture. (i) What would happen if 
blood behaved like a true suspension inside the body? (ii) In a blood 
sample, identify the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium.

Exploration|Grade 9
92
11.	 You are given a mixture of sand, common salt and naphthalene 
(Fig. 5.25a). The Fig. 5.25b depicts various steps used to separate the 
components of this mixture. Identify and write down the correct 
sequence of separation techniques.
1
2
3
Fig. 5.25: (b)
Fig. 5.25: (a)
12.	 Why is distillation an effective method for separating a mixture of 
water and acetone?
13.	 Answer the following questions with the help of the data given in 
Table 5.4.
Table 5.4: Solubility of various salts (in g per 100 g of water) 
at different temperatures
Salts
Temperature (°C)
10 °C
20 °C
30 °C
40 °C
60 °C
80 °C
Potassium nitrate
21
32
45
62
106
167
Sodium chloride
36
36
36.3
36.5
37
37
Potassium chloride
35
35
37.4
40
46
54
Ammonium chloride
24
37
41
41
55
66
(i)	 What mass of potassium nitrate would be needed to prepare its 	
saturated solution in 50 g of water at 40 °C?
(ii)	 A student makes a saturated solution of potassium chloride in 
water at 80 °C and leaves the solution to cool at room temperature 
(25 °C). What would she observe as the solution cools? Explain.
(iii)	 What is the effect of a change in temperature on the solubility of 
salts? Also, compare the changes in the solubility of the four given 
salts with increasing temperature from 10 °C to 80 °C.
14.	 Three students, A, B and C, are preparing sugar solutions for an 
experiment:
	y Student A dissolves 20 g of sugar in 80 g of water.
	y Student B dissolves 20 g of sugar in 100 g of water.
	y Student C dissolves 30 g of sugar in 80 g of water. 
(i)	 Calculate the mass percentage (% m/m) concentration of sugar in 
each student’s solution.
(ii)	 Whose solution is the most concentrated? Explain why.

Exploring Mixtures and their Separation
93
The Journey Beyond
15.	 Examine Fig. 5.26.
(i)	 Identify the separation technique marked as ‘S’.
(ii)	 Label the apparatus A, B and C.
(iii)	 Which of the following mixtures can be separated 
by the technique identified above? Use the data 
given in Table 5.5. Mixtures: 
(a) water — acetone 	
(b) water — salt
	
	 (c) acetone — alcohol 	
(d) sand — salt
	
	 (e) alcohol — chloroform 	 (f) alcohol — benzene
S ...........................................
Fig. 5.26
A
B
C
	y Demonstrate the Tyndall effect using different colloids. Create a series 
of experiments showcasing how light scatters in colloids making the 
beam visible. Use laser pointers (Safety first: Use it under the supervision 
of an adult), flashlights, or other light sources for your demonstrations.
	y Make crystals of different compounds (common salt, epsom salt, sugar, 
borax, nickel sulfate, etc.). Observe them under a magnifying glass or a 
microscope. Note down their colours and shapes. 
	y Do red leaves also contain green pigments? Investigate it using paper 
chromatography.
	y You can try chromatography to find the number of components present 
in a food colour (green, orange, yellow, etc.) or in coloured mouth 
fresheners (fennel seeds).
	y Design an educational game where players identify and apply 
separation techniques to different mixtures through interactive 
challenges and hands-on activities.
	y If you are camping outdoors and running short on clean water, you can 
obtain clean water by distillation. Can you think of a set-up with the 
items available to you?
	y To learn more about the states of matter and concentration of solutions, 
you can explore the links given below:
	
 https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/states-of-matter-basics/latest/
states-of-matter-basics_en.html
	
 https://phet.colorado.edu/sims/html/concentration/latest/
concentration_all.html
Table 5.5: Boiling points of some compounds
Solvent
Water
Acetone
Alcohol
Chloroform
Benzene
Temperature (°C)
100 °C
56 °C
78 °C
61 °C
80 °C
Can we create artificial blood that works just as real blood for all patients?
The Quest Continues …
