Exploration: Entering the World of Secondary Science
1
In the middle stage, science invited you to be curious and observe the 
world closely, to ask questions, and to find out how things work. In our 
journey, we discovered that science began with wonder and grew through 
careful experiments. We connected ideas across the world of the living and 
non-living. As you now enter the secondary stage, this journey continues, 
but with an emphasis on deep exploration. Science is not only about what 
we know, but also about how we know it — how observations lead to 
measurements, how patterns are expressed using symbols and equations, 
how models are built to represent complex systems, and how ideas are 
tested, often revised, and sometimes even discarded. In our secondary 
stage, textbook of science, Exploration, we will look more closely, think 
more carefully, and find out how scientific ideas help us make sense of 
nature, technology and our place within them.
To reflect the approach of this textbook, the page numbers have 
been thoughtfully designed, and are framed by a magnifying glass and a 
compass. The magnifying glass symbolises careful observation — noticing 
patterns and paying attention to what might otherwise be missed. The 
compass reminds us that exploration also needs direction — choosing 
appropriate models, asking the right questions, and knowing the limits of 
where our ideas apply. Together, they tell us that exploration in science is 
not wandering aimlessly, but trying to make sense of our world with care 
and purpose.
Chapter 
1
Exploration: Entering 
the World of 
Secondary Science

Exploration|Grade 9
2
The natural world is complex, and studying it in full detail is often 
impossible. To make sense of this complexity, science uses models. These 
are simplified ways of looking at real systems that focus only on what 
is most important for a given question. In physics, a moving car may be 
represented as a single point, while in chemistry, atoms and molecules 
are drawn as spheres and bonds. In biology, cells are shown as diagrams 
highlighting key parts, and in earth science, the Earth may be treated 
as a smooth sphere layered into distinct regions. Building such models 
involves making assumptions and deliberately ignoring certain details. For 
example, when studying the motion of a falling object, air resistance may 
be neglected to understand the basic effect of gravity. In biology, when 
studying how the heart pumps blood, many individual cells are ignored 
so that the organ can be understood as a functioning system. Remember 
that these choices are not mistakes, they are done on purpose to keep 
things simple enough, but still allow us to find answers to what we are 
looking for.
Example 1.1: A cricket shot. Think of a cricket ball being hit for 
a six. You want to make a simple model. What details would you 
include? What would you ignore?
Answer: We must ask, “Will the ball cross the boundary without 
hitting the ground first?”. For this, things like the brand of the 
bat, the colour of the ball, the amount of grass on the field will 
make no difference. On the other hand, the mass of the ball, 
and the speed and direction in which it has been hit will be 
very important. Air resistance, the spin of the ball, and the 
stitching of the threads at the seam have smaller effects that 
can be ignored in a simple model. As we build more and more 
complex models, we add extra details for greater accuracy. 
Activity 1.1: Let us model
Suppose you ride a bicycle from your school to your home. You 
want to model the time it takes to go home from school. What 
details would you keep? What details could you ignore? Suggest 
why ignoring some details may actually be useful.
As you explore science more deeply, you will notice that it 
uses language in a very careful and precise way. Many words 
that we use in everyday life, such as force, work, cell, or reaction, 
have specific meanings in science. These meanings are often 
very specific because scientific ideas must be communicated 
clearly and unambiguously. To allow scientists across the world 
to describe observations, compare results, and build ideas 
together, science uses a shared language of these specific terms, 
symbols, and units. Quantities, such as mass, velocity, force, and 
electric current are represented by symbols like m, v, F, and I, 
each associated with a defined unit. 
To make this even more precise, science often turns to 
mathematics to allow relationships between quantities to be 
expressed clearly and tested carefully. This can sometimes feel 
Meet a Scientist
Simplifying the stars: 
Science often begins by 
ignoring details. When 
physicist Meghnad Saha 
studied the light from stars, 
he did not try to model 
every atom, every reaction, 
or every movement inside a 
star. Instead, he treated the 
matter in the star as a hot 
gas, ignored many complex 
processes, and focused only 
on temperature, pressure, 
and how atoms formed 
ions. This simplification 
allowed him to explain 
how the colour of stars is 
deeply connected to their 
temperature.
Meghnad Saha on an 
Indian postage stamp

Exploration: Entering the World of Secondary Science
3
challenging, but it is important to remember that mathematics 
in science is not meant to be a hurdle. Instead, it is a language 
that helps us think more clearly about the world. An equation 
is not just a calculation tool, it is a compact statement about 
how certain things are related. For example, describing 
motion using quantities, such as distance, time, and velocity 
allows us to answer questions about where an object will 
be at a later moment. In the same way, mathematical 
expressions are used to describe rates of chemical reactions, 
patterns of population growth, or changes in energy within 
a system. Learning to use mathematics in science does not 
mean memorising equations. It means understanding the 
situation first, identifying relevant quantities, and then using 
mathematical relationships to reason carefully. In this way, 
mathematics becomes a powerful language for thinking, 
not just for finding numerical answers. If you focus first on 
understanding the situation and the quantities involved, 
equations will begin to feel less like obstacles and more like 
helpful guides in your exploration of science.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Airplane fuel miscalculation
In a well-known incident, a passenger aircraft ran out of fuel mid-flight due to a mix-up in units. 
The flight needed 22,300 kg fuel in total, but the ground crew miscalculated the fuel required, 
since they used the density of fuel in pounds (lb) per litre rather than kilograms (kg) per litre. 
The aircraft was about 15,000 litres short of fuel and luckily could glide to an emergency landing, 
which damaged the aircraft though there were no casualties. Pounds and kilograms are very 
different. Using standard (SI) units everywhere avoids conversions and errors. 
Why is a kilogram used everywhere? 
When we buy rice or vegetables we expect a kilogram 
to mean the same amount everywhere (Fig. 1.1). Imagine 
the confusion if we used different weights everywhere! 
Thankfully, 
measurements 
are 
based 
on 
agreed 
international standards, not local objects or opinions. 
Standard units allow scientific results to be compared, 
and ensure fairness in daily life and trade.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 1.1: A vegetable seller using a pan balance
As observations are repeated, measurements refined, and ideas tested 
through experiments, we can organise our understanding of the world 
in a systematic way. In the secondary stage, you will come across terms, 
such as laws, theories, and principles — terms that have specific meaning 
in science. A law usually describes a regular pattern observed in nature, 
often expressed using words or mathematical relationships. For example, 
Newton’s laws of motion explain the jerk felt when a bus stops suddenly. 
Threads of 
Curiosity
Why is the speed of light 
denoted by ‘c’? 
Scientific symbols often 
come from history, and 
are based on international 
agreements, not necessarily 
abbreviations of 
convenience. For example, 
the speed of light, is usually 
denoted with the symbol c, 
since it comes from the Latin 
word celeritas, meaning 
speed. Today, the speed of 
light is one of the physical 
constants, defined to be 
exactly 299792458 m/s.

Exploration|Grade 9
4
A theory goes a step further and provides an explanation of why those 
patterns occur, usually based on evidence gathered over time and available 
at that time. For example, the atomic theory explains how molecules are 
formed. Principles are broad ideas that help us make sense in a given 
situation. For example, the principle of conservation of energy being 
applied when climbing up the stairs. 
Do remember that in science, a theory does not mean a guess or an 
untested idea, it is an explanation based on careful testing and critical 
examination. These ideas are always open to improvement and often 
change as new evidence becomes available. This is a key feature of science 
that makes it reliable.
One of the most remarkable strengths of science is its ability to make 
predictions. When laws, theories, and models are well established, they 
allow us to anticipate what will happen under new or different conditions, 
before we can perform an experiment, and in many cases even if we cannot 
perform an experiment. Using ideas about motion, we can predict how far 
a kicked football will travel; using knowledge of chemical reactions, we can 
estimate how much carbon dioxide will be produced, or how soft a baked 
bread would be; using biological principles, we can predict how one’s 
breathing would change while running. Remember that these predictions 
are not guesses, they are reasoned expectations based on evidence and 
careful thinking. When predictions match observations, confidence in the 
underlying science grows. But even more important, when they do not, 
scientists re-examine their assumptions, models, or measurements. In this 
way, prediction is a powerful tool that drives further exploration and a 
deeper understanding of the world.
Example 1.2: How do we check predictions? Varsha told her friend 
Meghna, “It will rain this afternoon because the clouds look dark”. Think 
of some questions Meghna could ask Varsha to make this prediction 
scientifically testable.
Answer: Good scientific questions will look for measurable evidence and 
past patterns. Questions with simple yes/no answers are usually not so 
useful. Meghna could ask Varsha questions like (these are just examples) 
“What was the condition of sky when it rained the last time? What is the 
humidity today? Was it above 80 per cent the last time it rained? What is 
today’s wind speed and direction? Is the temperature dropping like it did 
before the recent rains?”. Questions like these ask about measurable data 
and past patterns, which go beyond mere ‘clouds look dark’.
Why do weather forecasts sometimes go wrong? 
Weather depends on many changing factors, such as temperature, pressure, humidity, and 
wind. Weather forecasts use measurements and models, but very tiny differences in conditions 
can grow over time and lead to something completely different. This is why forecasts are 
usually reliable for a few hours or even a few days, but less certain further into the future.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Even the most successful scientific theories have limits and may fail 
when new conditions are explored or when measurements become more 
1.	 Think of a 
prediction you 
or your family 
made recently 
(for example, 
the outcome 
of a cricket 
match). Was 
it based on 
evidence and 
reasoning, 
or mainly on 
guesswork? 
How can 
scientific 
thinking 
improve such 
predictions?
Pause and 
Ponder

Exploration: Entering the World of Secondary Science
5
precise. Such failures are not a weakness of science; in fact, they are its 
greatest strength. When predictions do not match observations, scientists 
do not reject ideas based on opinion or belief, but only on evidence. 
No scientific theory is ever final and none is beyond question. This 
openness to being corrected by nature itself is what has allowed science 
to help us in understanding the world we live in.
Threads of Curiosity
Checking ‘viral’ claims on social media: Is 
eating food harmful during an eclipse? 
A commonly circulated claim is that, “Food 
should not be eaten during an eclipse because it 
becomes harmful”. Disproof comes from asking 
simple scientific questions. An eclipse is just a 
play of shadows (Fig. 1.2). What physical change 
occurs during an eclipse? Does temperature 
change significantly? Does food go bad if it is left 
in a shadow? You will conclude that no physical, 
chemical, or biological mechanism supports 
such a claim. 
Fig. 1.2: A total solar eclipse
As you continue your journey through science in Grades 9 and 10, you 
will gradually develop habits of thinking that are useful far beyond the 
classroom. A helpful strategy is to first understand the situation being 
studied, then identify the quantities that matter, and finally make a rough 
estimate to check whether an answer makes sense. Exact values are not 
always necessary, especially in the early stages of reasoning. Often, an 
approximate estimate is enough to tell us whether a result is reasonable 
or impossible. Learning to estimate helps you build intuition, detect errors, 
and develop confidence in your thinking. Science values careful reasoning 
perhaps much more than accurate calculations!
How much rice would feed a family of four for a month?
To make a rough estimate, assume that all their 
calorie needs come from rice alone (Fig. 1.3). An 
average adult needs about 2000 – 2500 kilocalories 
(kcal) per day. Find out how many calories 100 g 
of uncooked rice provides when cooked and use 
this to estimate the daily requirement for the 
family. The aim is not to get an exact number, 
but to check whether the answer makes sense 
as 100 g for a month is clearly too little, while a 
few tonnes is far too much. Such estimation helps 
connect science to everyday questions about 
food and resources, and shows why approximate 
reasoning is an important scientific skill.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Fig. 1.3: Rice being 
cooked on a gas stove

Exploration|Grade 9
6
Example 1.3: Estimate how many litres of air you breathe in one day. Start 
by estimating how many breaths you take per minute, and the volume 
of one breath. Your aim is not to find an exact answer, but a reasonable 
estimate. 
Answer: At rest, we take about 12 – 15 breaths a minute, and there are 
60 × 24 = 1440 minutes in a day, so we take roughly 18 – 22 thousand 
breaths, about 20 thousand breaths a day. We also need to find the volume 
of air in one breath. One way to estimate this is to think that it takes about 
4 – 5 breaths to fill a typical rubber party balloon, which when inflated has 
a volume of about 2 litres. So, one breath is perhaps about 0.5 litre. Hence, 
we breathe in about 10,000 litres of air a day! 
Now, it is hard to see if this estimate is reasonable or not. But if 
we go back to our balloon example, one could blow up a balloon in 
about 20 s, so maybe we could fill 3 balloons a minute. Multiplying 
minute
3 balloon × balloon
2 litres ×
day
1440 minutes
 will give about 8640 litres, which 
for estimation purposes is reasonably close to our earlier estimate of 
10,000 litres. Naturally, we would get extremely tired very quickly after 
blowing balloons nonstop, unlike normal restful breathing.
Pause and Ponder
2.	 Describe one situation where an approximate answer is good enough, 
and one where you would need a very exact value.
After Grade 10, if you decide to study science, it will be divided into 
branches like physics, chemistry, biology and earth science, and even in 
Grades 9 and 10, the chapters you have will focus on some of these areas. 
We’ve highlighted some of the exciting things you may learn about in the 
Next Level Up boxes. However, do remember that the natural world does 
not have any such boundaries. These divisions are made by us to only 
help organise knowledge, they are not independent of each other. Most 
of the real-world problems today, such as understanding climate change, 
developing medicines, or designing sustainable technologies require ideas 
from several disciplines together. Science also connects naturally with 
mathematics, technology, arts, and social sciences. To make sense of the 
world fully, we need to connect multiple ways of knowing and expressing 
ideas, each enriching the other.
Pause and Ponder
3.	 Choose a real‑life object (maybe a pressure cooker or a mobile phone) or 
a problem (maybe a traffic jam near your school). Make a sketch listing 
what kind of ideas from physics, chemistry, biology, earth science, or 
mathematics are involved. Show how at least two branches of science 
connect with your example.

Exploration: Entering the World of Secondary Science
7
Ready to Go Beyond 
How does a mask really work?
Solving 
real 
problems 
requires 
knowledge from several branches of 
science. During the COVID-19 pandemic, 
we all used masks for safety (Fig. 1.4). 
Understanding how a mask works 
requires concepts from physics (particle 
motion and electrostatic attraction), 
chemistry 
(properties 
of 
polymer 
fibres), biology (size and behaviour of 
viruses), and mathematics (modelling 
airflow and filtration efficiency). 
Fig. 1.4: A collection of 
surgical masks
Finally, as we have mentioned in every textbook, science is not just a 
collection of facts, equations, or experiments. It is a human activity shaped 
by curiosity, creativity, collaboration, and careful questioning. It grows as 
people ask questions, test ideas, share results, and learn from mistakes. 
Science develops over time through the work of many individuals across 
different cultures and generations. Even if you do not choose to study 
science beyond Grade 10, scientific thinking will be very important in 
whatever you do. It helps you understand the technology that surrounds 
you, and helps you evaluate information critically and make sense of the 
world you live in. As you begin this stage of exploration, science invites 
you not only to learn about the world, but also to learn ‘how’ we are trying 
to understand it.
Embark on your journey of discovery — looking carefully through the 
magnifying glass of evidence and guided by the compass of curiosity. 
Happy Exploring!
