You already know that three-fourth of the
earth’s surface is covered with water, but only
a small proportion of it accounts for
freshwater that can be put to use. This
freshwater is mainly obtained from surface
run off and ground water that is continually
being renewed and recharged through the
hydrological cycle. All water moves within the
hydrological cycle ensuring that water is a
renewable resource.
You might wonder that if three-fourth of
the world is covered with water and water is
a renewable resource, then how is it that
countries and regions around the globe suffer
from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that
by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in
absolute water scarcity?
WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT
Given the abundance and renewability of
water, it is difficult to imagine that we may
suffer from water scarcity. The moment we
speak of water shortages, we immediately
associate it with regions having low rainfall
or those that are drought prone. We
instantaneously visualise the deserts of
Rajasthan and women balancing many
‘matkas’ (earthen pots) used for collecting
and storing water and travelling long
distances to get water. True, the availability
of water resources varies over space and time,
mainly due to the variations in seasonal and
annual precipitation, but water scarcity in
Reprint 2026-27

20
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
consequent greater demands for water, and
unequal access to it. A large population
requires more water not only for domestic
use but also to produce more food. Hence, to
facilitate higher food-grain production, water
resources are being over-exploited to expand
irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture.
Irrigated agriculture is the largest consumer
of water. Now it is needed to revolutionise the
agriculture through developing drought
resistant crops and dry farming techniques.
You may have seen in many television
advertisements that most farmers have their
Fig. 3.1:  Water Scarcity
most cases is caused by over-exploitation,
excessive use and unequal access to water
among different social groups.
Where is then water scarcity likely to
occur? As you have read in the hydrological
cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly
from precipitation, surface run off and
groundwater.
Is it possible that an area or region may
have ample water resources but is still facing
water scarcity? Many of our cities are such
examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an
outcome of large and growing population and
Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink:
After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent
districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain,
meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and
disrupted traffic.
A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.
Reprint 2026-27

21
WATER RESOURCES
own wells and tube-wells in their farms for
irrigation to increase their produce. But have
you ever wondered what this could result in?
That it may lead to falling groundwater levels,
adversely affecting water availability and food
security of the people.
Post-independent India witnessed
intensive industrialisation and urbanisation,
creating vast opportunities for us. Today, large
industrial houses are as commonplace as the
industrial units of many MNCs (Multinational
Corporations). The ever-increasing number of
industries has made matters worse by exerting
pressure on existing freshwater resources.
Industries, apart from being heavy users of
water, also require power to run them. Much
of this energy comes from hydroelectric power.
Moreover, multiplying urban centres with
large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have not only added to water and
energy requirements but have further
aggravated the problem. If you look into the
housing societies or colonies in the cities, you
would find that most of these have their own
groundwater pumping devices to meet their
water needs. Not surprisingly, we find that
fragile water resources are being over-
exploited and have caused their depletion in
several of these cities.
MULTI
ULTI
ULTI
ULTI
ULTI-PURPOSE
PURPOSE
PURPOSE
PURPOSE
PURPOSE R
 R
 R
 R
 RIVER
IVER
IVER
IVER
IVER P
 P
 P
 P
 P ROJECTS
ROJECTS
ROJECTS
ROJECTS
ROJECTS AND
AND
AND
AND
AND
INTEGRATED
NTEGRATED
NTEGRATED
NTEGRATED
NTEGRATED W
 W
 W
 W
 WATER
ATER
ATER
ATER
ATER R
 R
 R
 R
 RESOURCES
ESOURCES
ESOURCES
ESOURCES
ESOURCES M
 M
 M
 M
 MANAGEMENT
ANAGEMENT
ANAGEMENT
ANAGEMENT
ANAGEMENT
But, how do we conserve and manage water?
Archaeological and historical records show
that from ancient times we have been
constructing sophisticated hydraulic
structures like dams built of stone rubble,
reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals
for irrigation. Not surprisingly, we have
continued this tradition in modern India by
building dams in most of our river basins.
available to meet the needs of the people, but,
the area still suffers from water scarcity. This
scarcity may be due to bad quality of water.
Lately, there has been a growing concern that
even if there is ample water to meet the needs
of the people, much of it may be polluted by
domestic and industrial wastes, chemicals,
pesticides and fertilisers used in agriculture,
thus, making it hazardous for human use.
Government of India has accorded highest
priority to improve the quality of life and
enhance ease of living of people especially those
living in rual areas by announcing the Jal
Jeevan Mission (JJM). The Goal of JJM is to
enable every rural household get assured
supply of potable piped water at a service level
of 55 litres per capita per day regularly on
long-term basis by ensuring functionality of
the tap water connections. (Source: Economic
Survey 2020–21, p.357)
You may have already realised that the need
of the hour is to conserve and manage our
water resources, to safeguard ourselves from
health hazards, to ensure food security,
continuation of our livelihoods and productive
activities and also to prevent degradation of our
natural ecosystems. Over exploitation and
mismanagement of water resources will
impoverish this resource and cause ecological
crisis that may have profound impact on
our lives.
From your everyday experiences, write a short
proposal on how you can conserve water.
So far we have focused on the quantitative
aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider
another situation where water is sufficiently
Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India
• In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura
near Allahabad had sophisticated water
Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal) is being
implemented in 8220 water stressed Gram
Panchayats of 229 administrative blocks/
talukas in 80 districts of seven states, viz.
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and
Uttar Pradesh. The selected States account
for about 37 per cent of the total number
of water— stressed (over-exploited, critical
and semi-critical) blocks in India. One of
the key aspects of Atal Jal is to bring in
behavioural changes in the community,
from the prevailing attitude of
consumption to conservation and smart
water management.
Source:
Source:
Source:
Source:
Source: Annual Report, Ministry of Jal Shakti,
Government of India 2022–23
Reprint 2026-27

22
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
What are dams and how do they help us
in conserving and managing water? Dams
were traditionally built to impound rivers and
rainwater that could be used later to irrigate
agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not
just for irrigation but for electricity generation,
water supply for domestic and industrial
uses, flood control, recreation, inland
navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are
now referred to as multi-purpose projects
where the many uses of the impounded water
are integrated with one another. For example,
in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra –
Nangal project water is being used both for
hydel power production and irrigation.
Similarly, the Hirakud project in the
Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of
water with flood control.
Multi-purpose projects, launched after
Independence with their integrated water
resources management approach, were thought
of as the vehicle that would lead the nation to
development and progress, overcoming the
harvesting system channelling the flood
water of the river Ganga.
• During the time of Chandragupta Maurya,
dams, lakes and irrigation systems were
extensively built.
• Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works
have also been found in Kalinga,
(Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra
Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur
(Maharashtra), etc.
• In the 11th Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the
largest artificial lakes of its time was built.
• In the 13th–14th Century, the tank in Hauz
Khas, Delhi was constructed by Allauddin
Khilji (Khalji) for supplying water to Siri
Fort area.
Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997.
Find out more about any one traditional
method of building dams and irrigation works.
Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam
A dam is a barrier across flowing water that
obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often
creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment.
“Dam” refers to the reservoir rather than the
structure. Most dams have a section called a
spillway or weir over which or through which
it is intended that water will flow either
intermittently or continuously. Dams are
classified according to structure, intended
purpose or height. Based on structure and
the materials used, dams are classified as
timber dams, embankment dams or masonry
dams, with several subtypes. According to
the height, dams can be categorised as large
dams and major dams or alternatively as low
dams, medium height dams and high dams.
handicap of its colonial past. Jawaharlal Nehru
proudly proclaimed the dams as the ‘temples of
modern India’; the reason being that it would
integrate development of agriculture and the
village economy with rapid industrialisation and
growth of the urban economy.
We have sown the crops in Asar
We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra
Floods have swollen the Damodar
The sailing boats cannot sail
Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet
Reduce the floods a little
Bhadu will come a year later
Let the boats sail on your surface
(This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar valley
region narrates the troubles faced by people
owing to the flooding of Damodar river known
as the river of sorrow.)
Reprint 2026-27

23
WATER RESOURCES
In recent years, multi-purpose projects
and large dams have come under great
scrutiny and opposition for a variety of
reasons. Regulating and damming of rivers
affect their natural flow causing poor sediment
flow and excessive sedimentation at the bottom
of the reservoir, resulting in rockier stream
beds and poorer habitats for the rivers’ aquatic
life. Dams also fragment rivers making it
difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate, especially
for spawning. The reservoirs that are created
on the floodplains also submerge the existing
vegetation and soil leading to its
decomposition over a period of time.
Ironically, the dams that were constructed
to control floods have triggered floods due to
sedimentation in the reservoir. Moreover, the
big dams have mostly been unsuccessful in
controlling floods at the time of excessive
rainfall.
These floods have not only devastated life
and property but also caused extensive soil
erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the flood
plains were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser,
further adding on to the problem of land
degradation. It was also observed that the multi-
purpose projects induced earthquakes, caused
water-borne diseases and pests and pollution
resulting from excessive use of water.
Irrigation has also changed the cropping
pattern of many regions with farmers shifting
to water intensive and commercial crops. This
has great ecological consequences like
salinisation of the soil.
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
has been started which ensures access to some
means to protective irrigation for all agricultural
farms in the country, thus bringing much
desired rural prosperity. Some of the broad
objectives of this programme are to enhance
the physical access of water on the farm and
expand cultivable area under assured
irrigation (har khet ko pani), improve on-farm
water use efficiency to reduce wastage and
increase availability both in duration and
extent, irrigation and other water saving
technologies (per drop more crop) and
introduce sustainable water conservation
practices, etc.
Collect information about floods occurred in
different parts of the country due to heavy
rainfall in recent times.
Sardar Sarovar Dam has been built over
the Narmada River in Gujarat. This is one
of the largest water resource projects of
India covering four states—Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
The Sardar Sarovar project would meet the
requirement of water in drought-prone and
desert areas. Sardar Sarovar Project will
provide irrigation facilities to 18.45 lakh
hectare of land, covering 3112 villages in
15 districts of Gujarat. It will also irrigate
2,46,000 hectare of land in the strategic
desert districts of Barmer and Jalore in
Rajasthan and 37,500 hectare in the tribal
hilly tract of Maharashtra through lift.
About 75 per cent of the command area in
Gujarat is drought prone while entire
command in Rajasthan is drought prone.
Assured water supply will soon make this
area drought proof.
Source: Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd.
https://www.sardarsarovardam.org/
Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari
dispute is due to the objections raised by
Karnataka 
and 
Andhra 
Pradesh
governments? It is regarding the diversion
of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra
government for a multipurpose project. This
would reduce downstream flow in their
states with adverse consequences for
agriculture and industry.
Make a list of inter-state water disputes.
Reprint 2026-27

24
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
India:
India:
India:
India:
India:  Major Rivers and Dams
Reprint 2026-27

25
WATER RESOURCES
RAINWATER
AINWATER
AINWATER
AINWATER
AINWATER H
 H
 H
 H
 HARVESTING
ARVESTING
ARVESTING
ARVESTING
ARVESTING
Many thought that given the disadvantages
and rising resistance against the multi-
purpose projects, water harvesting system
was a viable alternative, both socio-
economically and environmentally. In
ancient India, along with the sophisticated
hydraulic structures, there existed an
extraordinary tradition of water-harvesting
system. People had in-depth knowledge of
rainfall regimes and soil types and developed
wide ranging techniques to harvest
rainwater, groundwater, river water and flood
water in keeping with the local ecological
conditions and their water needs. In hill and
mountainous regions, people built diversion
channels like the ‘guls’ or ‘kuls’ of the
Western Himalayas for agriculture. ‘Rooftop
rainwater harvesting’ was commonly
practised to store drinking water,
particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood plains
of Bengal, people developed inundation
channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and
semi-arid regions, agricultural fields were
converted into rain fed storage structures
that allowed the water to stand and moisten
the soil like the ‘khadins’ in Jaisalmer and
‘Johads’ in other parts of Rajasthan.
In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi
and Barmer, almost all the houses
traditionally had underground tanks or
tankas for storing drinking water. The tanks
could be as large as a big room; one
household in Phalodi had a tank that was
6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and 2.44
metres wide. The tankas were part of the well-
developed rooftop rainwater harvesting
Collect information about flood prone areas of the country
Reprint 2026-27

26
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
•
Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe
•
Filtered using sand and bricks
•
Underground pipe takes water to sump for
immediate usage
•
Excess water from the sump is taken to the well
•
Water from the well recharges the underground
•
Take water from the well (later)
(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell
Fig 3.3:
Fig 3.3:
Fig 3.3:
Fig 3.3:
Fig 3.3:  Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting
The rainwater can be stored in the
tankas
tankas
tankas
tankas
tankas till the next rainfall making it an
extremely reliable source of drinking water
when all other sources are dried up,
particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or
palar pani
palar pani
palar pani
palar pani
palar pani, as commonly referred to in these
parts, is considered the purest form of
natural water. Many houses constructed
underground rooms adjoining the ‘tanka’ to
beat the summer heat  as it would keep the
(a) Recharge through Hand Pump
system and were built inside the main house
or the courtyard. They were connected to the
sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe.
Rain falling on the rooftops would travel
down the pipe and was stored in these
underground ‘tankas’. The first spell of rain
was usually not collected as this would clean
the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater from
the subsequent showers was then collected.
Fig. 3.4
Fig. 3.4
Fig. 3.4
Fig. 3.4
Fig. 3.4
A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above
in the Kaza village, from which water is released
as and when required.
Fig 3.5:  
Fig 3.5:  
Fig 3.5:  
Fig 3.5:  
Fig 3.5:  Traditional method of rainwater
harvesting
Reprint 2026-27

27
WATER RESOURCES
Tamil Nadu is the first state in India
which has made rooftop rainwater
harvesting structure compulsory to all
the houses across the state. There are
legal provisions to punish the defaulters.
Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the
most common practice in Shillong,
Meghalaya. It is interesting because
Cherapunjee and Mawsynram  situated
at a distance of 55 km. from Shillong
receive the highest rainfall in the world,
yet the state capital Shillong faces acute
shortage of water. Nearly every
household in the city has a rooftop
rainwater harvesting structure. Nearly
15-25 per cent of the total water
requirement of the household comes
from rooftop water harvesting.
room cool.
Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the
practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on
the decline as plenty of water is available due
to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though
some houses still maintain the tankas since
they do not like the taste of tap water.
Fortunately, in many parts of rural and urban
India, rooftop rainwater harvesting is being
successfully adapted to store and conserve
water. In Gendathur, a remote backward
village in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers have
installed, in their household’s rooftop,
rainwater harvesting system to meet their
water needs. Nearly 200 households have
installed this system and the village has earned
the rare distinction of being rich in rainwater.
See Fig. 3.6 for a better understanding of the
rooftop rainwater harvesting system which is
adapted here. Gendathur receives an annual
precipitation of 1,000 mm, and with 80 per
cent of collection efficiency and of about 10
fillings, every house can collect and use about
50,000 litres of water annually. From the 200
houses, the net amount of rainwater harvested
annually amounts to 1,00,000 litres.
Fig. 3.6
Fig. 3.6
Fig. 3.6
Fig. 3.6
Fig. 3.6
Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns
and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on
the sloping roofs of houses is taken through a
pipe into an underground tanka (circular holes in
the ground). built in the main house or in the
courtyard. The picture above shows water being
taken from a neighbour’s roof through a long pipe.
Here the neighbour’s rooftop has been used for
collection of rainwater. The picture shows a hole
through which rainwater flows down into an
underground tanka.
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems
existing in and around your locality.
Reprint 2026-27

28
CONTEMPORARY INDIA – II
Fig 3.7
BAMBOO DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM
In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream
and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system,
gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally
reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.
Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert
water to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again
made and laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of
water into the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.
Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs
on the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.
Picture 5 and 6
Reduced channel sections
and diversion units are
used at the last stage of
water application. The last
channel section enables
water to be dropped near
the roots of the plant.
Picture 4: If the pipes pass a road,
they are taken high above the land.
1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.
Reprint 2026-27

29
WATER RESOURCES
EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES  EXERCISES
1.
1.
1.
1.
1.
Multiple choice questions.
(i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as
‘suffering from water scarcity’ or ‘not suffering from water scarcity’.
(a) Region with high annual rainfall.
(b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population.
(c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted.
(d) Region having low rainfall and low population.
(ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multi-
purpose river projects?
(a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from
water scarcity.
(b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods.
(c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of
livelihood.
(d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our
homes.
(iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them
correctly.
(a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources.
(b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river’s natural
flow and its sediment flow.
(c) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting
has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the Indira
Gandhi Canal.
2 .
2 .
2 .
2 .
2 . Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource.
(ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes?
(iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects.
3 .
3 .
3 .
3 .
3 . Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is
carried out.
(ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting
methods are being carried out to conserve and store water.
Reprint 2026-27
