Fig. 1 – Robert Clive 
accepting  the Diwani          
of Bengal, Bihar and 
Orissa from the Mughal 
ruler in 1765
The Company Becomes the Diwan
On 12 August 1765, the Mughal emperor appointed the East 
India Company as the Diwan of Bengal. The actual event most 
probably took place in Robert Clive’s tent, with a few Englishmen 
and Indians as witnesses. But in the painting above, the event 
is shown as a majestic occasion, taking place in a grand setting. 
The painter was commissioned by Clive to record the memorable 
events in Clive’s life. The grant of Diwani clearly was one such 
event in British imagination.
As Diwan, the Company became the chief financial 
administrator of the territory under its control. Now it had to think 
of administering the land and organising its revenue resources. 
This had to be done in a way that could yield enough revenue to 
meet the growing expenses of the company. A trading company 
had also to ensure that it could buy the products it needed and 
sell what it wanted. 
Ruling the Countryside                   
3
Reprint 2024-25

	
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE          27
Over the years, the Company also learnt that it had to 
move with some caution. Being an alien power, it needed 
to pacify those who in the past had ruled the countryside, 
and enjoyed authority and prestige. Those who had held 
local power had to be controlled but they could not be 
entirely eliminated.
How was this to be done? In this chapter we will see how the 
Company came to colonise the countryside, organise revenue 
resources, redefine the rights of people, and produce the crops 
it wanted.
Revenue for the Company
The Company had become the Diwan, but it still saw itself 
primarily as a trader. It wanted a large revenue income but 
was unwilling to set up any regular system of assessment and 
collection. The effort was to increase the revenue as much as it 
could and buy fine cotton and silk cloth as cheaply as possible. 
Within five years, the value of goods bought by the Company 
in Bengal doubled. Before 1765, the Company had purchased 
goods in India by importing gold and silver from Britain. Now 
the revenue collected in Bengal could finance the purchase of 
goods for export. 
Soon it was clear that the Bengal economy was facing a deep 
crisis. Artisans were deserting villages since they were being 
forced to sell their goods to the Company at low prices. Peasants 
were unable to pay the dues that were being demanded from them. 
Artisanal production was in decline, and agricultural cultivation 
showed signs of collapse. Then in 1770, a terrible famine killed 
ten million people in Bengal. About one-third of the population 
was wiped out.
Fig. 2 – A weekly market 
in Murshidabad in Bengal
Peasants and artisans 
from rural areas regularly 
came to these weekly 
markets (haats) to sell 
their goods and buy what 
they needed. These markets 
were badly affected during 
times of economic crisis.
Reprint 2024-25

28	
OUR PASTS – III
The need to improve agriculture
If the economy was in ruins, could the Company be certain 
of its revenue income? Most Company officials began to 
feel that investment in land had to be encouraged and 
agriculture had to be improved. 
How was this to be done? After two decades of debate 
on the question, the Company finally introduced the 
Permanent Settlement in 1793. By the terms of the 
settlement, the rajas and taluqdars were recognised 
as zamindars. They were asked to collect rent from the 
peasants and pay revenue to the Company. The amount 
to be paid was fixed permanently, that is, it was not to be 
increased ever in future. It was felt that this would ensure 
a regular flow of revenue into the Company’s coffers and 
at the same time encourage the zamindars to invest in 
improving the land. Since the revenue demand of the state 
would not be increased, the zamindar would benefit from 
increased production from the land. 
The problem
The Permanent Settlement, however, created problems. 
Company officials soon discovered that the zamindars 
were in fact not investing in the improvement of land. 
The revenue that had been fixed was so high that the 
zamindars found it difficult to pay. Anyone who failed 
to pay the revenue lost his zamindari. Numerous 
zamindaris were sold off at auctions organised by 
the Company.
By the first decade of the nineteenth century, the 
situation changed. The prices in the market rose and 
cultivation slowly expanded. This meant an increase in 
the income of the zamindars but no gain for the Company 
since it could not increase a revenue demand that had 
been fixed permanently.
Even then the zamindars did not have an interest 
in improving the land. Some had lost their lands in 
the earlier years of the settlement; others now saw the 
possibility of earning without the trouble and risk of 
investment. As long as the zamindars could give out the 
land to tenants and get rent, they were not interested in 
improving the land. 
Fig. 3 – Charles Cornwallis 
Cornwallis was the Governor-
General of Bengal when the 
Permanent Settlement was 
introduced.
Colebrook on 
Bengal ryots
In many villages of 
Bengal, some of the 
powerful ryots did not 
cultivate, but instead gave 
out their lands to others (the 
under-tenants), taking 
from them very high 
rents. In 1806, H. T. 
Colebrook described 
the conditions of these 
under-tenants in Bengal:
The 
under-tenants, 
depressed 
by 
an 
excessive 
rent 
in 
kind, and by usurious 
returns for the cattle, 
seed, and subsistence, 
advanced to them, 
can never extricate 
themselves 
from 
debt. In so abject a 
state, 
they 
cannot 
labour in spirit, while 
they earn a scanty 
subsistence 
without 
hope 
of 
bettering 
their situation. 
Activity

Why do you think Colebrook is concerned with the 
conditions of the under-ryots in Bengal? Read the 
preceding pages and suggest possible reasons. 
Source 1
Reprint 2024-25

	
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE          29
On the other hand, in the villages, the cultivator 
found the system extremely oppressive. The rent he paid 
to the zamindar was high and his right on the land was 
insecure. To pay the rent he had to often take a loan 
from the moneylender, and when he failed to pay the 
rent, he was evicted from the land he had cultivated 
for generations. 
A new system is devised
By the early nineteenth century, many of the Company 
officials were convinced that the system of revenue 
had to be changed again. How could revenues be fixed 
permanently at a time when the Company needed 
more money to meet its expenses of administration 
and trade? 
In the North Western Provinces of the Bengal 
Presidency (most of this area is now in Uttar Pradesh), 
an Englishman called Holt Mackenzie devised the 
new system which came into effect in 1822. He felt 
that the village was an important social institution 
in north Indian society and needed to be preserved. 
Under his directions, collectors went from village to 
village, inspecting the land, measuring the fields, 
and recording the customs and rights of different 
groups. The estimated revenue of each plot within a 
village was added up to calculate the revenue that 
each  village (mahal) had to pay. This demand  was 
to be revised periodically, not permanently fixed. The 
charge of collecting the revenue and paying it to the 
Company was given to the village headman, rather 
than the zamindar. This system came to be known as 
the mahalwari settlement.
The Munro system
In the British territories in the South, there was a similar 
move away from the idea of Permanent Settlement. The 
new system that was devised came to be known as the 
ryotwar (or ryotwari ). It was tried on a small scale by 
Captain Alexander Read in some of the areas that were 
taken over by the Company after the wars with Tipu Sultan. 
Subsequently developed by Thomas Munro, this system 
was gradually extended all over south India.
Read and Munro felt that in the south there were 
no traditional zamindars. The settlement, they argued, 
had to be made directly with the cultivators (ryots) who 
had tilled the land for generations. Their fields had to 
be carefully and separately surveyed before the revenue 
assessment was made. Munro thought that the British 
Mahal – In British 
revenue records, mahal 
is a revenue estate which 
may be a village or a 
group of villages.
Fig. 4 – Thomas Munro, Governor 
of Madras (1819 –26) 
Reprint 2024-25

30	
OUR PASTS – III
should act as paternal father figures protecting the 
ryots under their charge.
All was not well
Within a few years after the new systems were imposed, 
it was clear that all was not well with them. Driven by 
the desire to increase the income from land, revenue 
officials fixed too high a revenue demand. Peasants were 
unable to pay, ryots fled the countryside, and villages 
became deserted in many regions. Optimistic officials 
had imagined that the new systems would transform 
the peasants into rich enterprising farmers. But this 
did not happen. 
Crops for Europe
The British also realised that the countryside could 
not only yield revenue, it could also grow the crops 
that Europe required. By the late eighteenth century, 
the Company was trying its best to expand the 
cultivation of opium and indigo. In the century and 
a half that followed, the British persuaded or forced 
cultivators in various parts of India to produce other 
crops: jute in Bengal, tea in Assam, sugarcane in 
the United Provinces (now Uttar Pradesh), wheat 
in Punjab, cotton in Maharashtra and Punjab, rice 
in Madras.
How was this done? The British used a variety of methods 
to expand the cultivation of crops that they needed. Let us 
take a closer look at the story of one such crop, one such 
method of production.
Does colour have a 
history?
Figs. 5 and 6 are two 
images of cotton prints. 
The image on the left 
(Fig. 5) shows a kalamkari 
print created by weavers 
of Andhra Pradesh in 
India. On the right is 
a floral cotton print 
designed and produced 
by William Morris, a 
famous poet and artist 
of nineteenth-century 
Britain. There is one 
thing common in the
Fig. 5 – A kalamkari print, 
twentieth-century India
Fig. 6 – A Morris cotton print, late- 
nineteenth-century England
Activity

Imagine that you are a 
Company representative 
sending a report back 
to England about the 
conditions in rural areas 
under Company rule. 
What would you write?
Reprint 2024-25

	
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE          31
two prints: both use a rich blue colour – commonly called 
indigo. Do you know how this colour was produced?
The blue that you see in these prints was produced 
from a plant called indigo. It is likely that the blue dye 
used in the Morris prints in nineteenth-century Britain 
was manufactured from indigo plants cultivated in India. 
For India was the biggest supplier of indigo in the world at 
that time. 
Why the demand for Indian indigo?
The indigo plant grows primarily in the tropics. By the 
thirteenth century, Indian indigo was being used by cloth 
manufacturers in Italy, France and Britain to dye cloth.
However, only small amounts of Indian indigo reached 
the European market and its price was very high. 
European cloth manufacturers therefore had to depend 
on another plant called woad to make violet and blue 
dyes. Being a plant of the temperate zones, woad was 
more easily available in Europe. It was grown in northern 
Italy, southern France and in parts of Germany and 
Britain. Worried by the competition from indigo, woad 
producers in Europe pressurised their governments to 
ban the import of indigo.
Cloth dyers, however, preferred indigo as a dye. Indigo 
produced a rich blue colour, whereas the dye from woad 
was pale and dull. By the seventeenth century, European 
cloth producers persuaded their governments to relax the 
ban on indigo import. The French began cultivating indigo 
in St Domingue in the Caribbean islands, the Portuguese 
in Brazil, the English in Jamaica, and the Spanish in 
Venezuela. Indigo plantations also came up in many parts 
of North America.
By the end of the eighteenth century, the demand for 
Indian indigo grew further. Britain began to industrialise, 
and its cotton production expanded dramatically, creating 
an enormous new demand for cloth dyes. While the demand 
for indigo increased, its existing supplies from the West 
Indies and America collapsed for a variety of reasons. 
Between 1783 and 1789, the production of indigo in the 
world fell by half. Cloth dyers in Britain now desperately 
looked for new sources of indigo supply. 
From where could this indigo be procured? 
Britain turns to India
Faced with the rising demand for indigo in Europe, the 
Company in India looked for ways to expand the area under 
indigo cultivation. 
Plantation – A large 
farm operated by a 
planter employing 
various forms of 
forced labour. 
Plantations are 
associated with the 
production of coffee, 
sugarcane, tobacco, 
tea and cotton. 
Reprint 2024-25

32	
OUR PASTS – III
From the last decades 
of the eighteenth century, 
indigo cultivation in 
Bengal expanded rapidly 
and Bengal indigo came to 
dominate the world market. 
In 1788, only about 30 per 
cent of the indigo imported 
into Britain was from India. 
By 1810, the proportion had 
gone up to 95 per cent.
As the indigo trade 
grew, commercial agents 
a n d o f f i c i a l s o f t h e 
Company began investing 
in indigo production. Over 
the years many Company 
officials left their jobs 
to look after their indigo 
business. Attracted by 
the prospect of high profits, numerous Scotsmen and 
Englishmen came to India and became planters. Those 
who had no money to produce indigo could get loans 
from the Company and the banks that were coming up 
at the time.
How was indigo cultivated? 
There were two main systems of indigo cultivation – nij 
and ryoti. Within the system of nij cultivation, the planter 
produced indigo in lands that he directly controlled. 
He either bought the land or rented it from other 
zamindars and produced indigo by directly employing 
hired labourers. 
The problem with nij cultivation
The planters found it difficult to expand the area under 
nij cultivation. Indigo could be cultivated only on fertile 
lands, and these were all already densely populated. Only 
small plots scattered over the landscape could be acquired. 
Planters needed large areas in compact blocks to cultivate 
indigo in plantations. Where could they get such land 
from? They attempted to lease in the land around the 
indigo factory, and evict the peasants from the area. But 
this always led to conflicts and tension. 
Nor was labour easy to mobilise. A large plantation 
required a vast number of hands to operate. And labour 
was needed precisely at a time when peasants were usually 
busy with their rice cultivation. 
Fig. 7 – The Slave Revolt in               
St Domingue, August 1791,  
painting by January Scuhodolski
In the eighteenth century, French 
planters produced indigo and 
sugar in the French colony of 
St Domingue in the Caribbean 
islands. The African slaves who 
worked on the plantations rose 
in rebellion in 1791, burning 
the plantations and killing their 
rich planters. In 1792, France 
abolished slavery in the French 
colonies. These events led to the 
collapse of the indigo plantations 
on the Caribbean islands.
Slave – A person who is 
owned by someone else – 
the slave owner. A slave 
has no freedom and is 
compelled to work for the 
master. 
Reprint 2024-25

	
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE          33
Nij cultivation on a large scale also required many 
ploughs and bullocks. One bigha of indigo cultivation 
required two ploughs. This meant that a planter with 
1,000 bighas would need 2,000 ploughs. Investing 
on purchase and maintenance of ploughs was a big 
problem. Nor could supplies be easily got from the 
peasants since their ploughs and bullocks were busy 
on their rice fields, again exactly at the time that the 
indigo planters needed them. 
Till the late nineteenth century, planters were therefore 
reluctant to expand the area under nij cultivation. Less 
than 25 per cent of the land producing indigo was under 
this system. The rest was under an alternative mode of 
cultivation – the ryoti system.
Indigo on the land of ryots
Under the ryoti system, the planters 
forced the ryots to sign a contract, 
an agreement (satta). At times 
they pressurised the village 
headmen to sign the contract on 
behalf of the ryots. Those who 
signed the contract got cash 
advances from the planters at 
low rates of interest to produce 
indigo. But the loan committed 
the ryot to cultivating indigo on at 
least 25 per cent of the area under 
his holding. The planter provided 
the seed and the drill, while the 
cultivators prepared the soil, sowed 
the seed and looked after the crop. 
Fig. 8 – Workers harvesting 
indigo in early-nineteenth-century 
Bengal. From Colesworthy Grant, 
Rural Life in Bengal, 1860  
In India the indigo plant was cut 
mostly by men. 
Bigha – A unit of 
measurement of land. 
Before British rule, the 
size of this area varied. 
In Bengal the British 
standardised it to about 
one-third of an acre.
Fig. 9 – The Indigo plant being 
brought from the fields to the 
factory
Reprint 2024-25

34	
OUR PASTS – III
Fig. 13 – The indigo 
is ready for sale
Here you can see the last stage of the production – 
workers stamping and cutting  the indigo pulp that          
has been pressed and moulded. In the background you 
can see a worker carrying away the blocks for drying.
Fig. 12 – The Vat-Beater
The indigo worker 
here is standing 
with the paddle that 
was used to stir the 
solution in the vat. 
These workers had 
to remain in waist-
deep water for over 
eight hours to beat the      
indigo solution.
Fig. 11 – Women usually 
carried the indigo plant to               
the vats. 
Vat – A fermenting 
or storage vessel
Fig. 10 – An indigo factory located near indigo fields, painting by 
William Simpson, 1863
The indigo villages were usually around indigo factories owned by 
planters. After harvest, the indigo plant was taken to the vats in 
the indigo factory. Three or four vats were needed to manufacture 
the dye. Each vat had a separate function. The leaves stripped off 
the indigo plant were first soaked in warm water in a vat (known 
as the fermenting or steeper vat) for several hours. When the 
plants fermented, the liquid began to boil and bubble. Now the 
rotten leaves were taken out and the liquid drained into another 
vat that was placed just below the first vat. 
In the second vat (known as the beater vat), the solution was 
continuously stirred and beaten with paddles. When the liquid 
gradually turned green and then blue, lime water was added to 
the vat. Gradually the indigo separated out in flakes, a muddy 
sediment settled at the bottom of the vat and a clear liquid rose 
to the surface. The liquid was drained off and the sediment – 
the indigo pulp – transferred to 
another vat (known as the 
settling vat), and then 
pressed and dried for 
sale. 
Fermenting 
Vat
Beater 
Vat
How was indigo produced?
Reprint 2024-25

	
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE          35
When the crop was delivered to the planter after the 
harvest, a new loan was given to the ryot, and the cycle 
started all over again. Peasants who were initially tempted 
by the loans soon realised how harsh the system was. The 
price they got for the indigo they produced was very low 
and the cycle of loans never ended.
There were other problems too. The planters usually 
insisted that indigo be cultivated on the best soils in 
which peasants preferred to cultivate rice. Indigo, 
moreover, had deep roots and it exhausted the soil 
rapidly. After an indigo harvest the land could not be 
sown with rice. 
The “Blue Rebellion” and After
In March 1859, thousands of ryots in Bengal refused 
to grow indigo. As the rebellion spread, ryots refused 
to pay rents to the planters, and attacked indigo 
factories armed with swords and spears, bows and 
arrows. Women turned up to fight with pots, pans 
and kitchen implements. Those who worked for the 
planters were socially boycotted, and the gomasthas – 
agents of planters – who came to collect rent were 
beaten up. Ryots swore they would no longer take 
advances to sow indigo nor be bullied by the planters’ 
lathiyals – the lathi-wielding strongmen maintained by 
the planters.
Why did the indigo peasants decide that they would no 
longer remain silent? What gave them the power to rebel? 
Clearly, the indigo system was intensely oppressive. But 
those who are oppressed do not always rise up in rebellion. 
They do so only at times. 
In 1859, the indigo ryots felt that they had the  support 
of the local zamindars and village headmen in their 
rebellion against the planters. In many villages, headmen 
who had been forced to sign indigo contracts, mobilised 
the indigo peasants and fought pitched battles with the 
lathiyals. In other places even the zamindars went around 
villages urging the ryots to resist the planters. These 
zamindars were unhappy with the increasing power of the 
planters and angry at being forced by the planters to give 
them land on long leases. 
The indigo peasants also imagined that the British 
government would support them in their struggle 
against the planters. After the Revolt of 1857, the 
British government was particularly worried about the 
possibility of another popular rebellion. When the news 
spread of a simmering revolt in the indigo districts, 
 A song from an 
indigo-producing 
village
In the moments of 
struggle, people often 
sing songs to inspire each 
other and to build a sense 
of collective unity. Such 
songs give us a glimpse 
of their feelings. During 
the indigo rebellion, 
many such songs could 
be heard in the villages 
of lower Bengal. Here is 
one such song: 
The 
long 
lathis 
wielded 
by 
the 
planter of Mollahati /
now lie in a cluster
The babus of Kolkata 
have sailed down /to 
see the great fight
This time the raiyats 
are all ready, / they 
will no longer be 
beaten in silence 
They will no longer 
give up their life / 
without fighting the 
lathiyals.
Source 2
Reprint 2024-25

36	
OUR PASTS – III
the Lieutenant Governor toured the region in the winter 
of 1859. The ryots saw the tour as a sign of government 
sympathy for their plight. When in Barasat, the magistrate 
Ashley Eden issued a notice stating that ryots would not 
be compelled to accept indigo contracts, word went around 
that Queen Victoria had declared that indigo need not be 
sown. Eden was trying to placate the peasants and control 
an explosive situation, but his action was read as support 
for the rebellion. 
As the rebellion spread, intellectuals from Calcutta 
rushed to the indigo districts. They wrote of the misery of 
the ryots, the tyranny of the planters, and the horrors of 
the indigo system. 
Worried by the rebellion, the government brought in 
the military to protect the planters from assault, and set 
up the Indigo Commission to enquire into the system of 
indigo production. The Commission held the planters 
guilty, and criticised them for the coercive methods 
they used with indigo cultivators. It declared that indigo 
production was not profitable for ryots. The Commission 
asked the ryots to fulfil their existing contracts but also told 
them that they could refuse to produce indigo in future.
 “I would rather beg than sow indigo”
Hadji Mulla, an indigo cultivator of Chandpore, Thana 
Hardi, was interviewed by the members of the Indigo 
Commission on Tuesday, 5 June 1860. This is what he 
said in answer to some of the questions:
W. S. Seton Karr, President of the Indigo 
Commission: Are you now willing to sow indigo; 
and if not on what fresh terms would you be 
willing to do it?
Hadji Mulla: I am not willing to sow, and I 
don’t know that any fresh terms would satisfy me.
Mr Sale: Would you not be willing to sow at a 
rupee a bundle?
Hadji Mulla: No I would not; rather than sow 
indigo I will go to another country; I would rather 
beg than sow indigo. 
Indigo Commission Report, Vol. II, Minutes of Evidence, p. 67 
Source 3
Activity

Imagine you are a 
witness giving evidence 
before the Indigo 
Commission. W.S. Seton  
Karr asks you “On what 
condition will ryots grow 
indigo?” What will your 
answer be? 
Reprint 2024-25

	
RULING THE COUNTRYSIDE          37
Let’s recall
1.	 Match the following:
ryot 	
village
mahal	
peasant
nij		
cultivation on ryot’s lands
ryoti 	
cultivation on planter’s own land
2.	 Fill in the blanks:
(a)	 Growers of woad in Europe saw __________ 
as a crop which would provide competition 
to their earnings. 
(b)	 The demand for indigo increased in late 
eighteenth-century Britain because of 
__________.
(c)	 The international demand for indigo was 
affected by the discovery of __________.
(d)	 The Champaran movement was against 
__________.
Let’s discuss
3.	 Describe the main features of the Permanent 
Settlement. 
4.	 How was the mahalwari system different from the 
Permanent Settlement?
After the revolt, indigo production collapsed in Bengal. 
But the planters now shifted their operation to Bihar. 
With the discovery of synthetic dyes in the late nineteenth 
century, their business was severely affected, but yet 
they managed to expand production. When Mahatma 
Gandhi returned from South Africa, a peasant from Bihar 
persuaded him to visit Champaran and see the plight of 
the indigo cultivators there. Mahatma Gandhi’s visit in 
1917 marked the beginning of the Champaran movement 
against the indigo planters. 
Reprint 2024-25

38	
OUR PASTS – III
Let’s imagine
Imagine a conversation 
between a planter and 
a peasant who is being 
forced to grow indigo. 
What reasons would 
the planter give to 
persuade the peasant? 
What problems would 
the peasant point 
out? Enact their 
conversation.
5.	 Give two problems which arose with the new Munro 
system of fixing revenue.
6.	 Why were ryots reluctant to grow indigo?
7.	 What were the circumstances which led to the 
eventual collapse of indigo production in Bengal? 
Let’s do
8.	 Find out more about the Champaran movement and 
Mahatma Gandhi’s role in it. 
9.	 Look into the history of either tea or coffee 
plantations in India. See how the life of workers in 
these plantations was similar to or different from 
that of workers in indigo plantations.
Reprint 2024-25
