Tribals, Dikus and the 
Vision of a Golden Age
4
In 1895, a man named Birsa was seen roaming the forests and 
villages of Chottanagpur in Jharkhand. People said he had 
miraculous powers – he could cure all diseases and multiply 
grain. Birsa himself declared that God had appointed him 
to save his people from trouble, free them from the slavery 
of dikus (outsiders). Soon thousands began following Birsa, 
believing that he was bhagwan (God) and had come to solve 
all their problems.
Birsa was born in a family of Mundas – a tribal group 
that lived in Chottanagpur. But his followers included 
other tribals of the region – Santhals and Oraons. All of 
them in different ways were unhappy with the changes 
they were experiencing and the problems they were facing 
under British rule. Their familiar ways of life seemed to be 
disappearing, their livelihoods were under 
threat, and their religion appeared to be 
in danger. 
What problems did Birsa set out to resolve? 
Who were the outsiders being referred to as 
dikus, and how did they enslave the people of 
the region? What was happening to the tribal 
people under the British? How did their lives 
change? These are some of the questions you 
will read about in this chapter.
You have read about tribal societies last 
year. Most tribes had customs and rituals 
that were very different from those laid 
down by Brahmans. These societies also 
did not have the sharp social divisions 
that were characteristic of caste societies. 
All those who belonged to the same tribe 
thought of themselves as sharing common 
ties of kinship. However, this did not mean 
that there were no social and economic 
differences within tribes.
Fig. 1 – Women of the 
Dongria Kandha tribe 
in Orissa wade through  
the river on the way to 
the market
Reprint 2024-25

40	
OUR PASTS – III
How did Tribal Groups Live?
By the nineteenth century, tribal people in different parts 
of India were involved in a variety of activities. 
Some were jhum cultivators
Some of them practised jhum cultivation, that is, shifting 
cultivation. This was done on small patches of land, mostly 
in forests. The cultivators cut the treetops to allow sunlight 
to reach the ground, and burnt the vegetation on the land 
to clear it for cultivation. They spread the ash from the 
firing, which contained potash, to fertilise the soil. They 
used the axe to cut trees and the hoe to scratch the soil 
in order to prepare it for cultivation. They broadcast the 
seeds, that is, scattered the seeds on the field instead of 
ploughing the land  and sowing the seeds. Once the crop 
was ready and harvested, they moved to another field. 
A field that had been cultivated once was left fallow for 
several years, 
Shifting cultivators were found in the hilly and forested 
tracts of north-east and central India. The lives of  these 
tribal people depended on free movement within forests 
and on being able to use the land and forests for growing 
their crops. That is the only way they could practise 
shifting cultivation.  
Some were hunters and gatherers
In many regions, tribal groups lived by hunting 
animals and gathering forest produce. They saw forests 
as essential for survival. The Khonds were such a 
community living in the forests of Orissa. They regularly 
went out on collective hunts and then divided the meat 
amongst themselves. 
They ate fruits and roots 
collected from the forest 
and cooked food with the 
oil they extracted from 
the seeds of the sal and 
mahua. They used many 
forest shrubs and herbs 
for medicinal purposes, 
and sold forest produce 
in the local markets. The 
local weavers and leather 
workers turned to the 
Khonds when they needed 
supplies of kusum and 
palash flowers to colour 
their clothes and leather.
Fallow – A field left 
uncultivated for a while 
so that the soil recovers 
fertility
Sal – A tree
Mahua – A flower that 
is eaten or used to make 
alcohol
Fig. 2 – Dongria Kandha women 
in Orissa take home pandanus 
leaves from the forest to make 
plates
Reprint 2024-25

	
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE          41
From where did these forest 
people get their supplies of rice 
and other grains? At times they 
exchanged goods – getting what 
they needed in return for their 
valuable forest produce. At other 
times, they bought goods with the 
small amount of earnings they 
had. Some of them did odd jobs 
in the villages, carrying loads 
or building roads, while others 
laboured in the fields of peasants 
and farmers. When supplies of 
forest produce shrank, tribal 
people had to increasingly wander 
around in search of work as 
labourers. But many of them – like 
the Baigas of central India – were 
reluctant to do work for others. 
The Baigas saw themselves as 
people of the forest, who could 
only live on the produce of the 
forest. It was below the dignity of 
a Baiga to become a labourer. 
Tribal groups often needed 
to buy and sell in order to be 
able to get the goods that were 
not produced within the locality. This led to their 
dependence on traders and moneylenders. Traders came 
around with things for sale, and sold the goods at high 
prices. Moneylenders gave loans with which the tribals 
met their cash needs, adding to what they earned. But 
the interest charged on the loans was usually very 
high. So for the tribals, market and commerce often 
meant debt and poverty. They therefore came to see 
the moneylender and trader as evil outsiders and the 
cause of their misery. 
Some herded animals
Many tribal groups lived by herding and rearing animals. 
They were pastoralists who moved with their herds of 
cattle or sheep according to the seasons.  When the grass 
in one place was exhausted, they moved to another area. 
The Van Gujjars of the Punjab hills and the Labadis of 
Andhra Pradesh were cattle herders, the Gaddis of Kulu 
were shepherds, and the Bakarwals of Kashmir reared 
goats. You will read more about them in your history 
book next year.
Fig. 3 – Location of some tribal 
groups in India
Reprint 2024-25

42	
OUR PASTS – III
A time to hunt, a time to sow, a time to move to a new field
Have you ever noticed that people living in different types of societies do not 
share the same notion of work and time? The lives of the shifting cultivators and 
hunters in different regions were regulated by a calendar and division of tasks 
for men and women. 
Verrier Elwin, a British anthropologist who lived among the Baigas and Khonds 
of central India for many years in the 1930s and 1940s, gives us a picture of what 
this calendar and division of tasks was like. He writes:  
In Chait women went to clearings to ... cut stalks that were already reaped; 
men cut large trees and go for their ritual hunt. The hunt began at full 
moon from the east. Traps of bamboo were used for hunting. The women 
gathered fruits like sago, tamarind and mushroom. Baiga women can only 
gather roots or kanda and mahua seeds. Of all the adivasis in  Central India, the 
Baigas were known as the best hunters … In Baisakh the firing of the forest 
took place, the women gathered unburnt wood to burn. Men continued 
to hunt, but nearer their villages. In Jeth sowing took place and hunting 
still went on. From Asadh to Bhadon the men worked in the fields. In Kuar 
the first fruits of beans were ripened and in Kartik kutki became ripe. In 
Aghan every crop was ready and in Pus winnowing took place. Pus was also 
the time for dances and marriages. In 
Magh shifts were made to new bewars 
and hunting-gathering was the main 
subsistence activity. 
The cycle described above took 
place in the first year. In the second 
year there was more time for hunting 
as only a few crops had to be sown 
and harvested. But since there was 
enough food the men lived in the 
bewars. It was only in the third year 
that the diet had to be supplemented 
with the forest products.
Adapted from Verrier Elwin, Baiga (1939) and Elwin’s 
unpublished ‘Notes on the Khonds’ (Verrier Elwin 
Papers, Nehru Memorial Museum and Library)
Source 1
Fig. 4 – A Santhal girl carrying firewood, 
Bihar, 1946
Children go with their mothers to the forest 
to gather forest produce.
Activity
Look carefully at the tasks that Baiga 
men and women did. Do you see any 
pattern? What were the differences 
in the types of work that they were 
expected to perform? 
Reprint 2024-25

	
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE          43
Some took to settled cultivation
Even before the nineteenth century, many from within 
the tribal groups had begun settling  down, and 
cultivating their fields in one place year after year, 
instead of moving from place to place. They began 
to use the plough, and gradually got rights over the 
land they lived on. In many cases, like the Mundas of 
Chottanagpur, the land belonged to the clan as a whole. 
All members of the clan were regarded as descendants 
of the original settlers, who had first cleared the land. 
Therefore, all of them had rights on the land. Very 
often some people within the clan acquired more power 
than others, some became chiefs and others followers. 
Powerful men often rented out their land instead of 
cultivating it themselves.
British officials saw settled tribal groups like the Gonds 
and Santhals as more civilised than hunter-gatherers or 
shifting cultivators. Those who lived in the forests were 
considered to be wild and savage: they needed to be settled 
and civilised. 
How did Colonial Rule Affect Tribal 
Lives?
The lives of tribal groups changed during British rule. Let 
us see what these changes were.
What happened to tribal chiefs?
Before the arrival of the British, in many areas the tribal 
chiefs were important people. They enjoyed a certain 
amount of economic power and had the right to administer 
and control their territories. In some places they had 
their own police and decided on the local rules of land 
and forest management. Under British rule, the functions 
and powers of the tribal chiefs changed considerably. 
They were allowed to keep their land titles over a cluster 
of villages and rent out lands, but they lost much of their 
administrative power and were forced to follow laws made 
by British officials in India. They also had to pay tribute 
to the British, and discipline the tribal groups on behalf 
of the British. They lost the authority they had earlier 
enjoyed amongst their people, and were unable to fulfil 
their traditional functions.
What happened to the shifting cultivators?
The British were uncomfortable with groups who moved 
about and did not have a fixed home. They wanted tribal 
Bewar – A term used           
in Madhya Pradesh for 
shifting cultivation
Fig. 5 – A log house being built 
in a village of the Nyishi tribes of  
Arunachal Pradesh.
The entire village helps when log 
huts are built.
Reprint 2024-25

44	
OUR PASTS – III
groups to settle down and become peasant cultivators. 
Settled peasants were easier to control and administer 
than people who were always on the move. The British 
also wanted a regular revenue source for the state. 
So they introduced land settlements – that is, they 
measured the land, defined the rights of each individual 
to that land, and fixed the revenue demand for the 
state. Some peasants were declared landowners, others 
tenants. As you have seen (Chapter 2), the tenants were 
to pay rent to the landowner who in turn paid revenue 
to the state.
The British effort to settle jhum cultivators was not 
very successful. Settled plough cultivation is not easy in 
areas where water is scarce and the soil is dry. In fact, 
jhum cultivators who took to plough cultivation often 
suffered, since their fields did not produce good yields. 
So the jhum cultivators in north-east India insisted 
on continuing with their traditional practice. Facing 
widespread protests, the British had to ultimately allow 
them the right to carry on shifting cultivation in some 
parts of the forest.
Fig. 6 – Bhil women cultivating in 
a forest in Gujarat
Shifting cultivation continues 
in many forest areas of Gujarat. 
You can see that trees have been 
cut and land cleared to create 
patches for cultivation.
Fig. 7 – Tribal workers in a rice field in Andhra Pradesh
Note the difference between rice cultivation in the flat plains and in 
the forests.
Reprint 2024-25

	
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE          45
Forest laws and their impact
The life of tribal groups, as you have seen, was directly 
connected to the forest. So changes in forest laws had a 
considerable effect on tribal lives. The British extended 
their control over all forests and declared that forests were 
state property. Some forests were classified as Reserved 
Forests for they produced timber which the British wanted. 
In these forests people were not allowed to move freely, 
practise jhum cultivation, collect fruits, or hunt animals. 
How were jhum cultivators to survive in such a situation? 
Many were therefore forced to move to other areas in search 
of work and livelihood. 
But once the British stopped the tribal people from 
living inside forests, they faced a problem. From where 
would the Forest Department get its labour to cut trees 
for railway sleepers and to transport logs?
Colonial officials came up with a solution. They decided 
that they would give jhum cultivators small patches of land 
in the forests and allow them to cultivate these on the 
condition that those who lived in the villages would have 
to provide labour to the Forest Department and look after 
the forests. So in many regions, the Forest Department 
established forest villages to ensure a regular supply of 
cheap labour.
“In this land of the English how hard it is to live”
In the1930s Verrier Elwin visited the land of the Baigas – a tribal group in 
central India. He wanted to know about them – their customs and practices, 
their art and folklore. He recorded many songs that lamented the hard time 
the Baigas were having under British rule.
In this land of the English how hard it is to live
How hard it is to live
In the village sits the landlord
In the gate sits the Kotwar
In the garden sits the Patwari 
In the field sits the government
In this land of the English how hard it is to live
To pay cattle tax we have to sell cow
To pay forest tax we have to sell buffalo
To pay land tax we have to sell bullock
How are we to get our food?
In this land of the English
Quoted in Verrier Elwin and Shamrao Hivale,  Songs of the Maikal, p. 316.
Source 2
Sleeper – The horizontal 
planks of wood on which 
railway lines are laid
Reprint 2024-25

46	
OUR PASTS – III
Fig. 8 – Godara women weaving
Many tribal groups reacted against the 
colonial forest laws. They disobeyed the 
new rules, continued with practices that 
were declared illegal, and at times rose 
in open rebellion. Such was the revolt of 
Songram Sangma in 1906  in Assam, and 
the forest satyagraha of the 1930s in the 
Central Provinces.
The problem with trade
During the nineteenth century, tribal 
groups found that traders and money-
lenders were coming into the forests more 
often, wanting to buy forest produce, 
offering cash loans, and asking them to 
work for wages. It took tribal groups some 
time to understand the consequences of 
what was happening.
Let us consider the case of the silk 
growers. In the eighteenth century, Indian 
silk was in demand in European markets. 
The fine quality of Indian silk was highly 
valued and exports from India increased 
rapidly. As the market expanded, East India Company 
officials tried to encourage silk production to meet the 
growing demand. 
Hazaribagh, in present-day Jharkhand, was an area 
where the Santhals reared cocoons. The 
traders dealing in silk sent in their agents 
who gave loans to the tribal people and 
collected the cocoons. The growers 
were paid ` 3 to ` 4 for a thousand 
cocoons. These were then 
exported to Burdwan or 
Gaya where they were 
sold at five times the 
price. The middlemen 
– so called because 
they arranged deals 
between the exporters 
and silk growers – made 
huge profits. The silk 
growers earned very 
little. Understandably, 
many tribal groups saw 
the market and the 
traders as their main 
enemies.  
Fig. 9 – A Hajang 
woman weaving a mat
For women, domestic 
work was not confined 
to the home. They 
carried their babies 
with them to the fields 
and the factories.
Reprint 2024-25

	
TRIBALS, DIKUS AND THE VISION OF A GOLDEN AGE          47
The search for work
The plight of the tribals who had to go far away from their homes 
in search of work was even worse. From the late nineteenth 
century, tea plantations started coming up and mining became 
an important industry. Tribals were recruited in large numbers 
to work at the tea plantations of Assam and the coal mines 
of Jharkhand. They were recruited through contractors who 
paid them miserably low wages, and prevented them from 
returning home.
A Closer Look
Through the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, tribal groups 
in different parts of the country rebelled against the changes 
in laws, the restrictions on their practices, the new taxes they 
had to pay, and the exploitation by traders and moneylenders. 
The Kols rebelled in 1831–32, Santhals rose in revolt in 1855, 
the Bastar Rebellion in central India broke out in 1910 and the 
Warli Revolt in Maharashtra in 1940. The movement that Birsa 
led was one such movement.
Fig. 10 – Coal miners of 
Bihar, 1948
In the 1920s, about 50 per 
cent of the miners in the 
Jharia and Raniganj coal 
mines of Bihar were tribals. 
Work deep down in the dark 
and suffocating mines was 
not only back-breaking 
and dangerous, it was 
often literally killing. In the 
1920s, over 2,000 workers 
died every year in the coal 
mines in India.
Activity
Find out whether 
the conditions of 
work in the mines 
have changed 
now. Check how 
many people die in 
mines every year, 
and what are the 
reasons for their 
death.
 

Reprint 2024-25

48	
OUR PASTS – III
Birsa Munda
Birsa was born in the mid-1870s. The son of a poor father, 
he grew up around the forests of Bohonda, grazing sheep, 
playing the flute, and dancing in the local akhara. Forced 
by poverty, his father had to move from place to place 
looking for work. As an adolescent, Birsa heard tales of 
the Munda uprisings of the past and saw the sirdars 
(leaders) of the community urging the people to revolt. 
They talked of a golden age when the Mundas had been 
free of the oppression of dikus, and said there would be 
a time when the ancestral right of the community would 
be restored. They saw themselves as the descendants of 
the original settlers of the region, fighting for their land 
(mulk ki larai), reminding people of the need to win back 
their kingdom.
Birsa went to the local missionary school, and listened 
to the sermons of missionaries. There too he heard it said 
that it was possible for the Mundas to attain the Kingdom 
of Heaven, and regain their lost rights. This would be 
possible if they became good Christians and gave up their 
“bad practices”. Later Birsa also spent some time in the 
company of a prominent Vaishnav preacher. He wore the 
sacred thread, and began to value the importance of purity 
and piety.
Birsa was deeply influenced by many of the ideas he 
came in touch with in his growing-up years. His movement 
was aimed at reforming tribal society. He urged the Mundas 
to give up drinking liquor, clean their village, and stop 
believing in witchcraft and sorcery. But we must remember 
that Birsa also turned against missionaries and landlords. 
He saw them as outside forces that were ruining the Munda 
way of life.
In 1895, Birsa urged his followers to recover their 
glorious past. He talked of  a golden age in the past – a 
satyug (the age of truth) – when Mundas lived a good 
life, constructed embankments, tapped natural springs, 
planted trees and orchards, practised cultivation to 
earn their living. They did not kill their brethren and 
relatives. They lived honestly. Birsa also wanted people 
to once again work on their land, settle down and 
cultivate their fields. 
What worried British officials most was the political 
aim of the Birsa movement, for it wanted to drive 
out missionaries, moneylenders, landlords, and the 
government and set up a Munda Raj with Birsa at 
its head. The movement identified all these forces as 
the cause of the misery the Mundas were suffering. 
‘Blood trickles 
from my shoulders’
The songs the Mundas 
sang bemoaned their 
misery. 
Alas! 
under 
[the 
drudgery of] forced 
labour
Blood trickles from 
my shoulders
Day and night the 
emissary from the 
zamindars,
Annoys and irritates 
me, day and night I 
groan
Alas! This is my 
condition
I do not have a 
home, where shall I 
get happiness
Alas!
K.S. Singh, Birsa Munda and 
His Movement, p.12.
Source 3
Vaishnav – Worshippers 
of Vishnu
Reprint 2024-25

	
tribals, dikus and the vision of a golden age          49
The land policies of the British were destroying their 
traditional land system, landlords and moneylenders were 
taking over their land, and missionaries were criticising 
their traditional culture.
As the movement spread the British officials decided to 
act. They arrested Birsa in 1895, convicted him on charges 
of rioting and jailed him for two years. 
When Birsa was released in 1897, he began touring 
the villages to gather support. He used traditional 
symbols and language to rouse people, urging them 
to destroy “Ravana” (dikus and the Europeans) and 
establish a kingdom under his leadership. Birsa’s 
followers began targeting the symbols of diku and 
European power. They attacked police stations and 
churches, and raided the property of moneylenders 
and zamindars. They raised the white flag as a symbol 
of Birsa Raj.  
In 1900, Birsa died of cholera and the movement 
faded out. However, the movement was significant in at 
least two ways. First – it forced the colonial government to 
introduce laws so that the land of the tribals could not be 
easily taken over by dikus. Second – it showed once again 
that the tribal people had the capacity to protest against 
injustice and express their anger against colonial rule. 
They did this in their own specific way, inventing their 
own rituals and symbols of struggle.
Let’s recall
1.	 Fill in the blanks:
(a)	 The British described the tribal people as 
____________.
(b)	 The method of sowing seeds in jhum cultivation 
is known as ____________.
(c)	 The tribal chiefs got _________ titles in central 
India under the British land settlements.
(d)	 Tribals went to work in the __________ of Assam 
and the ____________ in Bihar.  
Postal stamp issued in memory 
of Birsa Munda
Reprint 2024-25

50	
OUR PASTS – III
2.	 State whether true or false:
(a)	 Jhum cultivators plough the land and sow seeds.
(b)	 Cocoons were bought from the Santhals and  sold 
by the traders at five times the purchase price.
(c)	 Birsa urged his followers to purify themselves, 
give up drinking liquor and stop believing in 
witchcraft and sorcery.
(d)	 The British wanted to preserve the tribal way of 
life.
Let’s discuss
3.	 What problems did  shifting cultivators face under 
British rule?
4.	 How did the powers of tribal chiefs change under 
colonial rule?
5.	 What accounts for the anger of the tribals against 
the dikus?
6. 	What was Birsa’s vision of a golden age? Why do 
you think such a vision appealed to the people of 
the region?
Let’s do
7.	 Find out from your parents, friends or teachers, 
the names of some heroes of other tribal revolts 
in the twentieth century. Write their story in your 
own words.
8.	 Choose any tribal group living in India today. Find 
out about their customs and way of life, and how 
their lives have changed in the last 50 years.
Let’s imagine
Imagine you are a 
jhum cultivator living 
in a forest village 
in the nineteenth 
century. You have 
just been told that the 
land you were born 
on no longer belongs 
to you. In a meeting 
with British officials 
you try to explain the 
kinds of problems you 
face. What would you 
say? 
Reprint 2024-25
