The Mathematics of Maybe: 
Introduction to Probability
7.1 What is Probability?
Probability is a type of measurement, similar to how we measure 
quantities like length, area, or volume. However, instead of measuring 
physical quantities, probability is used to measure the likelihood of 
events. Specifically, it helps us express how confident or certain we are 
that a particular event will occur. For example, you may ask your friend: 
•	
Is it going to rain today?
•	
Will our school win the inter-school 
­hockey match tomorrow? 
•	
Will I be chosen in the monthly lucky 
draw to perform at the school assembly? 
[The names of all the students in school 
are written on slips of paper and one 
slip is randomly selected.]
These events are examples of random 
events. We know the possible outcomes 
(either it will rain today or it will not; our school 
team will either win, draw or lose the hockey 
match; one student will be chosen to perform at the school assembly), 
but we do not know in advance which one will definitely occur. That is, 
there is an element of chance or randomness involved every time such 
an event takes place. 
Can we predict these outcomes with 100% certainty? One could 
respond to these questions with words such as impossible or certain, 
or using phrases such as less likely, more likely or equally likely. This 
decision is based on different kinds of evidence that have been gathered. 
For example, one friend might say, “The sun is shining brightly, so it’s 
unlikely to rain today”, while another might observe, “It’s very hot, which 
makes me think it could rain later”. In both cases, they are predicting 
rainfall based on how they interpret the present weather conditions. This 
is the subjective probability given to the event of today’s rainfall. 
7

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
156
As you can see from the above example, probability deals 
with uncertainty or chance. One key feature of our increasingly 
complicated society is that we must deal with questions that have no 
fixed answer but rather one or more possibilities for the answer. Thus, 
understanding how to objectively estimate the probability of events 
is crucial in many aspects of life.
In this chapter, we will learn how we can measure probability more 
objectively, i.e., the ways of collecting evidence that can be used for 
an objective estimate of likelihood. But first, we must understand a few 
terms and ideas such as randomness and the probability scale.
7.1.1 What is Randomness?
Randomness refers to a situation or action (like the tossing of a coin or 
the rolling of a die) where you cannot predict exactly what will happen. 
Although you may know all the possible outcomes, you cannot say 
which one will definitely occur.  For example, 
•	
Tossing a coin: You know it could be heads or tails, but you 
cannot be sure which one will come up in a single toss.
•	
Rolling a die: You know the possible outcomes are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6, 
but you do not know which number will appear on a particular roll.
These observations (commonly called experiments or trials in 
probability) are called random because of their unpredictability. The 
lucky draw example mentioned earlier is an example of a random 
observation or experiment, as the outcome cannot be predicted in 
advance, and each student has an equal chance of being selected. All 
you can say is what could happen, not what will happen. 
Random Observations: A random experiment is something you 
can repeat (like tossing a coin), where every time you do it, the result 
might be different and you cannot know the outcome in advance.  
Think and Reflect
Such unpredictability can be useful sometimes!  For example, in a ­cricket 
match, the fact that a coin is tossed to decide which team will bat first is 
considered to be a fair method. Can you explain why?
Probability is the area of mathematics that studies randomness 
and how likely a specific outcome is to happen in a random situation. 
For example, when you toss a coin, the probability for heads is 1
2, and 

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
157
for tails is 1
2, because each is equally likely. In a random experiment, 
every outcome has a chance to occur, but you can only determine the 
likelihood, not the exact result. 
Have you wondered what makes an event like rain random? 
An event like rain is considered random because it depends on many 
complex factors in the atmosphere (such as temperature, humidity, 
wind patterns, and pressure) and is so sensitive to these factors that 
it is impossible to predict it with total certainty. Thus, it is impossible 
to know with absolute certainty whether it will rain on a specific day. 
Randomness in rain means that while the exact timing and location of 
rainfall cannot be predicted perfectly, we can estimate the likelihood 
or probability of rain in different locations based on patterns and 
probabilities derived from data.
Think and Reflect
Ask your friend to predict the outcome of a ` 1 coin you toss.  
Do you see that your friend could guess heads or tails but could not know 
for certain? That’s randomness! All possible results are known, but each 
individual try is unpredictable.
7.1.2 The Probability Scale 
Probability is measured on a scale from 0 to 1 to indicate the 
likelihood of the occurrence of an event. If the probability of your 
school winning the hockey match is 0.75, that means there is a 75% 
chance your school will win. This means that it is more likely than 
not that your school will win the match. If the probability of your 
school winning the hockey match is 0.5, that means there is a 50% 
chance your school will win. This means that it is equally likely that 
your school will win or lose the match. On the other hand, if the 
probability is 0, it would mean winning is impossible (for example, 
winning without playing), and if the probability is 1, it would mean 
your school is certain to win. The probabilities of most events fall 
somewhere strictly between 0 and 1, expressing how likely they are 
to happen.
Imagine a deck of six cards where the number of purple and 
green cards is unknown. The probability of picking a purple card 
from the deck (see Fig. 7.1) can range from impossible (if there are 

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
158
no purple cards) to certain (if all six are purple). As the number 
of purple cards increases, the likelihood of selecting a purple card 
moves smoothly along the probability scale from less likely, to even 
chance, to more likely. This scale helps us understand and compare 
how likely different events are, just like using a number line! 
Fig. 7.1: Probabilities of picking a purple card  
from a deck on the probability scale
Here are a few examples of events and the probabilities of their 
occurrence. Look at the examples against the probability scale in 
Fig. 7.1 to understand how probability is measured on a scale. 
Event
What it means
Getting a number greater than  
6 on a die
Impossible: Dice only have numbers 
from 1 to 6.
Rolling a 3 on a standard die
Less likely: But not impossible as one 
face of the die is 3. 
Flipping a coin and getting heads
Even chance: Heads or tails are equally 
likely.

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
159
Drawing any number from 2 to  
10 from a deck of 52 cards
More likely: There are 36 cards in a deck 
of 52 cards with numbers from 2 to 10.
Choosing a red sweet from a bag 
of all red sweets
Certain: All the sweets are red.
Exercise Set 7.1
	 1.	 Rank the following events on a scale from 0 (Impossible) to 
1 (Certain). Label each event: Impossible, less likely, equally likely 
(even chance), more likely, certain. Give reasons why you gave 
each event its ranking.
	
(i)	
The next Monday will come after Sunday. 
	
(ii)	
It will snow in Mumbai in July.
	
(iii)	
An elephant will walk through your classroom today.
	
(iv)	
You will greet at least one friend at school tomorrow.
7.2 Measuring Probability Objectively
There are two main ways of estimating the probability of an event 
objectively:
	 1.	 Using evidence from experience: This involves collecting 
data either by performing an experiment multiple times or by 
analysing statistical data from past observations. In both cases, the 
probability is estimated by calculating the relative frequency of the 
event based on the collected evidence. We call this experimental 
probability.
	 2.	 Using theoretical methods: This approach assumes that all 
possible outcomes are equally likely (when there is no reason to 
believe that any one outcome is more likely than another). The 
probability is then determined by reasoning about the number of 
favourable outcomes in relation to the total number of possible 
outcomes. We call this theoretical probability.

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
160
7.2.1 Experimental Probability: Performing Observations or 
Experiments
Another way of obtaining objective estimates for probabilities is to 
perform an experiment. In an experiment, the event is a result of the 
experiment and is called an outcome. The set of all possible outcomes 
in an experiment is called the sample space. 
The sample space may be listed within brackets, separated by 
commas as shown below.  
Example 1: Experiment: A coin is tossed
Possible Outcomes: Heads (H) or Tails (T) (See Fig. 7.2)
Sample Space: {H, T}
Experiment: A die is rolled
Possible Outcomes: The top side of the die shows 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 dots 
(See Fig. 7.3)
Sample Space: {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
	
	
	
Fig. 7.2: Heads and tails of a coin	
Fig. 7.3: A 6-sided die
Experimental Probability = Number of times the event occurred 
Total Number of trials
 .
Example 2: Suppose you roll a die 50 times, and it lands on a 4 
exactly 8 times. 
Experimental probability of rolling a 4 is 8
50
0 16
16
= .
%
 
 
or
.
We also say that the relative frequency of rolling a 4 is 8
50
0 16
= .
.
Relative frequency helps you understand probability based on 
actual data, rather than theoretical predictions. It is especially useful 
in statistics and data analysis when you are working with observed 
outcomes.

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
161
Did you know? The game of Snakes 
and Ladders originates in ancient 
India. It evolved from a traditional 
dice game called Jñān-Chaupad̤, 
which was used as an educational tool. 
Jñān-Chaupad̤  aimed to convey moral 
lessons, with each ladder symbolising 
a virtue and each snake representing a 
vice. Through gameplay, it illustrated 
the consequences of good and bad 
behaviour. Various versions of  
Jñān-Chaupad̤  have been found in 
different parts of India.
Fig. 7.4: A Jain Jñān-Chaupad̤  game 
on cloth, National Museum  
(India, 19th century)
7.2.2 Theoretical Probability
Theoretical probability studies the likelihood of an event happening 
based on all possible outcomes being equally likely. It is what we 
expect to happen in an ideal, perfectly fair situation. In this scenario, 
no experiment or data is required. Theoretical probability is usually 
denoted as P (Event) or P (Outcome).
Theoretical Probability (P) = 
Number of favourable outcomes 
Number of possible outcomes  .
Example 3: If you roll a standard 6-sided die, what is the theoretical 
probability of getting a 4?
Solution:
Number of favourable outcomes = 1 (only the number 4)
Number of all possible outcomes = 6 (the numbers 1 through 6)
P (rolling a 4) = 
1 
6 = 0.1666… ≈ 0.167 or 16.7%.
Example 4: A letter is picked at random from the word 
‘PROBABILITY’. What is the probability of picking the letter B?

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
162
Solution:
Number of favourable outcomes = 2 (there are 2 Bs in the word 
PROBABILITY)
Number of all possible outcomes = 11 (The number of letters in the 
word PROBABILITY)
P (Picking the letter B) = 
2 
11 = 0.1818... ≈ 0.182 or 18.2%.
7.2.3 Analysing Statistical Data Using Probability
The way of collecting evidence through statistical data is used 
extensively in the world of business for marketing, forecasting sales, 
insurances and in science and social science research.
Example 5: Suppose you anonymously collect information 
regarding the favourite fruit of 50 students in your class. Let us assume 
that the results are: 20 students like mango, 15 students like apples, 10 
students like bananas, and 5 students like grapes. 
Let us play a game! Suppose we randomly pick one student from the 
class and try to guess their favourite fruit. What’s the probability that 
the student’s favourite fruit is mango? Statistical probability is based 
on collected data. So, a reasonable estimate that the student’s favourite 
fruit is mango is
Probability of mango as the favourite fruit 
= 
Number of students who like mango 
Total number of students
 =
=
20
50
0 4
. .
So, there is a 0.4 or 40% chance that a randomly chosen student in 
the class likes mango.
Now assume that you want to buy fruits for the entire school 
depending on the students’ favourite fruits. You would need to 
estimate the quantity of each type of fruit you need to purchase for the 
entire school of, say, 1500 students. It is usually impractical to collect 
data from all students or the entire population. The application of 
statistical probability in the real world is usually based on evidence 
collected from a sample. The population, i.e., the total number of 
students in the school, is 1500, and we collected evidence from a sample 
of 50 students from one class. An estimate of the probability that mango 

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
163
is the favourite fruit was calculated to be 0.4. So, that would mean 
that we need to buy approximately 600 (40% of 1500) mangoes, while 
the remaining would be other fruits — apples, bananas and grapes. If 
we want to be more confident about our estimate, we would choose a 
larger sample, for example, by asking 100 students, and make sure it is 
more representative, such as including students from different classes 
or grades. This process is called sampling in statistics.
LEARN MORE ABOUT SAMPLING
Want to learn more about sampling? What we have learned so far is 
just the beginning! 
When collecting data through samples, there are other important things 
to think about — like how big your sample should be and how to make 
sure your sample truly represents the whole population. The size of your 
sample and making sure it’s fair and not biased can help your results be 
more accurate.
If you are interested and want to explore more about why sample size 
and representation matter in statistics, you can read more about it in print 
or digital resources.
Summarising, experimental probability is based on actual data 
collected from trials, not on assumptions. Theoretical probability 
relies on the assumption of equally likely outcomes (a perfectly fair 
situation) and does not use experimental data. Even in perfectly 
fair situations, experimental probability can differ from theoretical 
probability, especially when the number of trials is small. As the 
number of trials increases, the experimental probability tends to get 
closer to the theoretical probability — this is known as the Law of 
Large Numbers. 
Think and Reflect
If I have rolled a 4 on a die 8 times in succession, the probability of ­rolling 
a 4 again is still only ≈ 0.16 (assuming the die is fair). Probability does 
not tell you what will happen next but predicts what will happen in the 
long run.

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
164
GAMBLER’S FALLACY
Many people think that if something random happens many times in a 
row (like flipping a coin and getting heads six times), then the opposite 
outcome (tails) is more likely to happen next. But actually, the coin does 
not keep track of what happened before. Every time you flip, the chance 
of heads or tails stays exactly the same — like starting afresh. The coin has 
no memory, so past flips do not change what happens next. This common 
misunderstanding is called Gambler’s Fallacy.
For example, imagine that you are flipping a fair coin. It comes up heads 
six times in a row. You might feel that on the next flip you are sure to get 
a tail, because tails haven’t come up for a while. However, the probability 
of getting tails on the next flip is still 50% or 
1 
2, exactly the same as before. 
The coin has no memory of past flips!
Example 6: Let us say you are playing Snakes and Ladders, and you 
are rolling a fair 6-sided die to move. 
You have just rolled the die three times in a row, and each time you 
got a 6.
Now, you think: ‘I have already rolled three 6s — there is no way I 
will get a 6 again on the next roll!’
This thinking is Gambler’s Fallacy — because each roll of the die is 
an independent event. The probability of rolling a 6 is always: 
1 
6 ≈ 0.166 
or 16.6%.
It does not change based on what happened in previous turns.
Key Idea: In Snakes and Ladders, as in many games of chance, 
each roll of dice is independent. The Gambler’s Fallacy tricks people 
into believing there is a pattern, when in fact, such randomness has no 
memory.
FAIR AND UNBIASED
When we speak of a coin, we assume it to be ‘fair’, i.e., it is symmetrical 
so that there is no reason for it to come down more often on one side 
than the other. We call this property of the coin as being ‘unbiased’. By 
the phrase ‘random toss’, we mean that the coin is allowed to fall freely 
without any bias or interference.

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
165
Exercise Set 7.2
	 1.	 A teacher mixes a large bag of sweets of different colours and 
randomly selects a sample of 30 sweets. She counts the number of 
sweets of each colour:  
10 red sweets | 8 green sweets | 7 yellow sweets | 5 blue sweets 
	
(i)	
Calculate the probability that a randomly picked sweet from 
the sample is green. 
	
(ii)	
If there are 600 sweets in total in the large bag, estimate how 
many are likely to be yellow, based on the sample results.
	 2.	 A survey is conducted at a school where a random sample of 40 
students is asked about their favourite club. The responses are: 
	
	 14 students: Science Club | 11 students: Arts Club | 
	
	 9 students: Sports Club | 6 students: Debate Club 
	
	 Assume there are 800 students in the whole school.
	
(i)	
What is the probability that a randomly chosen student from 
the sample prefers the Arts Club?
	
(ii)	
Using the sample results, estimate how many students in the 
whole school are likely to prefer the Sports Club.  
	 3.	 Toss a coin 20 times and record the result each time (heads or tails). 
	
(i)	
How many times did you get heads? 
	
(ii)	
How many times did you get tails?
	
(iii)	
Calculate the experimental probability of getting heads. 
	
(iv)	
If you toss the coin once more, what is the probability of 
getting tails? 
	 4.	 Toss a paper cup into the air 
100 times. After each toss record 
whether the cup lands on its 
bottom, upside down on its top 
or on its side (See Fig. 7.5). Assign 
probabilities to the outcomes by 
using experimental probability. 
	 5.	 What is the probability of getting 
an even number when rolling a 
fair 6-sided die?
Fig. 7.5: Paper cup landing positions 
(left to right) — bottom, top and side

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
166
	 6.	 Suppose you roll a 6-sided die 12 times and get a ‘3’ three times. 
	
(i)	
What is the experimental probability of rolling a ‘3’? 
	
(ii)	
What is the theoretical probability of rolling a ‘3’?
	
(iii)	
Why might these probabilities be different? What would you 
expect to happen if you roll the die 60, 600, or 6000 times?
7.3 Elements of Probability: Sample Spaces and 
Events  
7.3.1 Sample Space 
Recall that the sample space, denoted by S, is the list of all possible 
outcomes. Each possible outcome is called an element of the sample space. 
•	
The sample space S must include every possible outcome.
•	
No outcome should be listed more than once.
•	
The number of elements in the sample space is called the sample 
size and is denoted by n(S).
Examples of Sample Space
	 1.	 The sample space for whether it rains tomorrow could be S = {Rain, 
No Rain} and the sample size n(S) = 2.
	 2.	 The sample space for a match, i.e., the possible outcomes for a team 
playing — could be S = {Win, Lose, Draw} and sample size n(S) = 3.
	 3.	 Tossing a Coin:
•	
Experiment: Tossing a fair coin once. 
•	
Sample Space: S = {Heads (H), Tails (T)}
•	
Sample Size = 2 
	 4.	 Rolling a Die: 
•	
1Experiment: Rolling a standard 6-sided die.
•	
1Sample Space: S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
•	
Sample Size = 6 
	 5.	 Tossing Two Coins:
•	
1Experiment: 
Tossing 
two 
coins 
simultaneously. 
•	
1Sample Space: S = {HH, HT, TH, TT} 
•	
1Sample Size = 4
Coin 1
Coin 2
Outcome
H
H
HH
H
T
HT
T
H
TH
T
T
TT

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
167
Think and Reflect
When we used the sample space {Rain, No Rain} in Example 1, we 
focused only on whether it will rain or not. However, if we want to  
include different amounts of rainfall like drizzle, light rain or heavy rain, 
we need to expand the sample space to {No Rain, Drizzle, Light Rain, Heavy 
Rain} so that it better matches the level of detail required for the question. 
It is important to ensure the sample space is detailed enough to suit the 
specific problem being studied.
7.3.2 Events
An event is any single possible result or combination of results that 
might happen when you perform a random action. It is like choosing 
particular outcomes from all the things that could possibly occur. 
An event is a subset of a sample space. 
Examples of Sample Spaces and Events
	 1.	 Tossing Two Coins 
•	
Sample space: All possible results like Head–Head, Head–Tail, 
Tail–Head, Tail–Tail. S = Sample Space = {HH, HT, TH, TT}  
•	
Event: ‘At least one coin shows Head.’ E = {HH, HT, TH}.  
	 2.	 Rolling a 6-sided Die 
•	
Sample space: All faces numbered 1 through 6. S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
•	
Event: ‘The number rolled is greater than 4.’ E = {5, 6}.
	 3.	 Picking Fruit from a Basket
•	
Sample space: Types of fruit you might pick, for example, 
Apple, Banana and Orange. S = {Apple, Banana, Orange}
•	
Event: ‘Picking a fruit that is yellow.’ E = {Banana}.
Exercise Set 7.3
	 1.	 When a single 6-sided die is rolled, what is the total number of 
possible outcomes in the sample space?
	 2.	 For the following experiments write down the sample space S. 
	
(i)	
Rolling a die and tossing a coin together.

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
168
	
(ii)	
Choosing a random integer between – 5 and + 5. 
	
(iii)	
A box containing 5 green and 7 red balls. One ball is drawn at 
random.
	 3.	 In a village fair, there are 3 popular snacks available: Samosa, 
Pakora, and Bhaji. For drinks, villagers can choose either Chai or 
Lassi. 
	
(i)	
List the sample space of all possible snack and drink 
combinations a person could choose at the fair.
	
(ii)	
List the event ‘Selecting Samosa as a snack.’
7.4 Tree diagrams
A tree diagram is a visual representation used to list all possible 
outcomes of a multi-step experiment. A multi-step experiment involves 
a series of independent trials. For example, tossing a coin two times, or 
rolling a dice three times are examples of multi-step experiments. Each 
branch of the tree represents a possible outcome, and branches split to 
show different paths for subsequent events.
A tree diagram is useful for
•	
Visualising multi-step experiments, where each path from start to 
end represents one complete outcome.
•	
Listing all outcomes of a sample space.
So far in this chapter, we have seen examples of single-step 
experiments. Let us look at an example of a multi-step experiment.
Example 7: Experiment: Toss a fair coin two times.
Tree Diagram (See Fig. 7.6): 
From a single point draw 
a line to each of the possible 
outcomes of the first toss. 
From each of these outcomes 
draw 
two 
lines 
to 
each 
possible outcome. Do you see 
that the tree diagram shows 
4 possible outcomes?
Hence the Sample Space 
S = {HH, HT, TH, TT}.
Fig. 7.6: Tree diagram showing possible  
 outcomes when we toss a fair coin twice

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
169
Also, the theoretical probabilities of each outcome are mentioned on 
the branch representing that outcome.
Theoretical Probability (P) = 
Number of favourable outcomes
Number of possible outcomes
 .
Let us consider the event of getting Heads twice. This is represented 
by the outcome HH.
Probability of HH = 1
4 = 0.25 or 25%.  
Think and Reflect
Can you calculate the probability of getting one head and one tail?
Exercise Set 7.4
	 1.	 There are two fruit baskets A and B. Basket A has one apple and two 
oranges. Basket B has one banana and one mango. You randomly 
pick one fruit from each basket.
	
(i)	
Draw a tree diagram showing all possible pairs of fruits.
	
(ii)	
List the sample space.
	
(iii)	
What is the probability of picking one apple and one 
banana?
	 2.	 Let us say that you have a box containing 3 red pens, 4 black pens 
and 2 green pens. You pick a pen (without looking) from the box 
and put it back. Then your friend does the same. 
	
(i)	
What are the possible outcomes of the pen colours? Can you 
draw a tree diagram representing the possible outcomes?
	
(ii)	
Can you use the tree diagram to guess the probability that 
both you and your friend pick pens of the same colour? 
End-of-Chapter Exercises
	 1.	 Fill in the blanks.
	
(i)	
The probability of an impossible event is _______.

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
170
	
(ii)	
The set of all possible outcomes of a random experiment is 
called the __________.
	
(iii)	
The probability of an event that is certain to happen is _______.
	
(iv)	
Tossing a fair coin has a probability of ______ for getting 
heads.
	 2.	 In a survey of 50 students, 15 students said they liked football. 
The number of students who like football is 15, and the ________ 
(frequency/relative frequency) is __________ (fill in the fraction or 
decimal).
	 3.	 Which of the following experiments have equally likely outcomes? 
Explain.
	
(i)	
A driver attempts to start a car. The car starts or does not start.
	
(ii)	
Tossing a fair coin once.
	
(iii)	
Rolling a fair 6-sided die.
	
(iv)	
Choosing a marble randomly from a bag that contains 3 red 
marbles and 7 blue marbles.
	
(v)	
A baby is born. It is a boy or a girl.
	 4.	 Write the sample space and calculate the probability based on 
the given information.
	
(i)	
Two coins are tossed at the same time. What is the probability 
of getting at least one head?
	
(ii)	
Ten identical cards numbered 1 to 10 are placed in a box. One 
card is drawn at random. What is the probability of drawing 
a card with an even number?
	
(iii)	
A die is rolled once. What is the probability of getting a 
number greater than 4?
	
(iv)	
A bag contains 3 red balls, 2 blue balls, and 1 green ball. One 
ball is picked at random. What is the probability that it is not 
red?
	
(v)	
Three coins are tossed simultaneously. What is the 
probability of getting exactly two heads?
	 5.	 A bag has 3 candies: strawberry, lemon, and mint. One is picked at 
random. What is the probability of picking a strawberry candy?

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
171
	 6.	 A child has 2 shirts (one red and one blue) and 3 types of pants 
(jeans, khakis, and shorts). List all the possible combinations of 
outfits consisting of one shirt and one pair of pants. Display your 
answer in a table format.
	 7.	 A tyre company records distances before replacement in 1000 cases.
Distance 
(km)
Less than 
4000
4001 to 
9000
9001 to 
14000
More than 
14000
Number of 
cases
20
210
325
445
	
	 Find the probability that a randomly chosen tyre lasts:
	
(i)	
Less than 4000 km. 
	
(ii)	
Between 4000 and 14000 km.
	
(iii)	
More than 14000 km.
	 8.	 The letters of the word ‘PEACE’ are placed on cards. Leela draws a 
card without looking. 
	
(i)	
What is the probability that it 
is a P, E or C?
	
(ii)	
What is the probability that it is not an E? 
	*9.	 A game of chance consists of spinning an arrow (see Fig. 7.7.) which 
comes to rest pointing at one of the numbers 
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and these are equally likely 
outcomes. What is the probability that it will 
point at 
	
(i)	
8?
	
(ii)	
An odd number? 
	
(iii)	
A number greater than 2? 
	
(iv)	
A number less than 9?
	
(v)	
A multiple of 3? 
	*10.	 A basket contains 4 red balls and 5 blue balls. One ball is drawn 
and laid aside, and a second ball is drawn. Draw a tree diagram 
to represent the possible outcomes and probabilities. Use the tree 
diagram to answer the following questions.
P
E
A
C
E
Fig. 7.7

Ganita Manjari | Grade 9 | Part I
172
	
(i)	
What is the probability of drawing a red ball and then a blue 
ball?
	
(ii)	
What is the probability of drawing 2 blue balls?
	*11.	 I throw a pair of 6-sided dice. Write down an event that has a 
probability of 0 and an outcome that has a probability of 1.
 	*12.	Write the sample space and calculate the probability based on the 
given information.
	
(i)	
Two dice are rolled. What is the probability that the sum is a 
prime number greater than 5? 
	
(ii)	
A bag contains 4 red, 3 green, and 2 blue balls. Two balls are 
drawn without replacement. What is the probability that 
both are of different colours?
	
(iii)	
Three coins are tossed. What is the probability that the first 
coin shows heads and exactly two heads occur in total?
	
(iv)	
A four-digit number is formed using the digits 1, 2, 3, and 4 
with no repetition. What is the probability that the number 
is even?
	
(v)	
A student takes a multiple-choice test with 3 questions, each 
having 4 options (A, B, C, D), with only one correct answer. 
What is the probability that the student guesses and gets 
exactly 2 answers correct?
	*13.	 A box contains 4 balls numbered 1 to 4. Record a sample space 
using a tree diagram for the following experiments:
	
(i)	
A ball is drawn, and the number is recorded. Then the ball is 
returned, and a second ball is drawn and recorded.
	
(ii)	
A ball is drawn and recorded. Without replacing the first 
ball, the experimenter draws and records a second ball.
	
(iii)	
What are the sizes of these two sample spaces?
	*14.	 List the elements of a sample space for the simultaneous tossing 
of a coin and drawing of a card from a set of 6 cards numbered 1 
through 6.
	*15.	 Three coins are tossed, and the number of heads is recorded. 
Which of the following lists is a sample space for this experiment? 
Why do the other lists fail to qualify as a sample space?

The Mathematics of Maybe: Introduction to Probability
173
	
(i)	
{1, 2, 3}
	
(ii)	
{0, 1, 2}
	
(iii)	
{0, 1, 2, 3, 4}
	
(iv)	
{0, 1, 2, 3}
	*16.	 Suppose you drop a dye at random on 
the rectangular region shown in Fig. 7.8. 
What is the probability that it will land 
inside the circle with a diameter of 1 m?
Chapter Summary
	
z
Probability is a measurement of the likelihood of an event. 
	
z
Probability is expressed on a scale from 0 (indicating impossibility) 
to 1 (indicating certainty), representing the likelihood of an event 
occurring. The probability of an event E is denoted as P(E), where 
0 ≤ P(E) ≤ 1.
	
z
Experimental probability is determined by conducting an 
experiment and is calculated as: 
	
	 Experimental Probability = 
Number of times the event occurred
Total number of trials
 .
	
z
Theoretical probability is based on all possible outcomes in a fair 
situation, assuming each is equally likely: 
	
	 Theoretical Probability of an event A is 
	
	 P(A) = 
Number of favourable outcomes
Number of possible outcomes  .
	
z
A sample space is the list of all possible outcomes of a random 
experiment. It is represented as a set S = {outcome1, outcome2 …, 
outcomen}.
	
z
An event is any one or a group of possible outcomes from a random 
experiment. It is like picking results or outcomes from all that 
could happen. 
	
z
Tree diagrams help us to list and visualise all possible outcomes of 
a random experiment. They also help us calculate probabilities of 
events related to random experiments.
Fig. 7.8
2 m
3 m
