I’m Up and Down, and 
Round and Round
Humanity has always been fascinated by the shapes of the things 
around them. In some early cave paintings, the sun is depicted as a 
circle. In the cave paintings of Gudahandi in Odisha, one sees numerous 
geometric patterns including triangles, squares, circles, and ovals. 
These shapes were likely inspired by what humans saw in nature. 
Can you recognise the origin of the shapes in Fig. 5.1?
Fig. 5.1
Circles form when raindrops fall on water. The cross-section of a 
plant stem and the inflorescence of a sunflower are also circular in 
shape. The full moon and sun also look circular. 
	
	
	
Moon 	
Sun (during a total solar eclipse) 
Fig 5.2
5

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
93
What properties are common to all circles, big and small? You have 
studied one such property in Grade 7. Humans must have noticed it 
after observing many circular patterns in nature. Every circle has a 
centre. All points on the circle are at equal distance from the centre. We 
turn this observation around and make it the definition of a circle. 
Activity: List some objects from nature that resemble a circle.
Think and Reflect
Jamuna has a circular piece of paper. She is trying to locate its centre. 
­Amina gives her a suggestion. She follows the instructions and is thrilled 
to find that it works. Can you guess what Amina told her?
5.1 Definitions
When we talk of mathematical shapes such as circles, triangles and 
squares, we always assume that the figures are drawn on a piece of 
paper — a two-dimensional plane.
C
D
E
B
A
Fig. 5.3: Circle, Centre A, Chord BC
A circle is the set of all points 
on the plane that are equidistant 
from a given point on that plane. 
The set of points that satisfy a 
given condition is also called the 
locus of points that satisfy the 
condition. Using this term, a circle 
can also be described as the locus 
of points that are equidistant 
from a given point. The given 
point is the centre of the circle. 
The distance from the centre 
to any point on the circle is the 
radius of the circle.
In Fig 5.3, A is the centre of the circle. All points on the plane at a 
distance equal to the length of AB from A form a circle with centre A 
and radius equal to the length of AB.
Let B and C be two points on the circle. The line segment BC is called 
a chord of the circle.  The angle subtended by the chord BC at the centre 
is angle BAC. A chord passing through the centre of a circle is called 
a diameter.

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
94
5.2 Symmetries of a Circle
What makes circles so appealing is that they are perfectly symmetrical. 
Say you are looking at a wheel of a vehicle. You see a point of the 
wheel touching the ground. When you look at the wheel again after 
some time, you again see a point of the wheel touching the ground. Can 
you tell if the two points are the same point? There is no way you can 
tell; a rotating wheel looks the same at all times! We say the circle has 
complete rotational symmetry: rotate it by any angle and it looks exactly 
the same.
Draw a circle on the paper and cut along the circle. Fold the circular 
paper so that the boundaries overlap, then open it. You see a crease; it is 
a line of reflection symmetry of the circle. Does this line pass through the 
centre of the circle? It does. It is a diameter of the circle. All diameters 
are lines of reflection symmetry.
Think and Reflect
1.	 What are the rotational symmetries of a square? How many lines of 
reflection symmetry does it have? What about a regular pentagon?  
A regular hexagon?
2.	 What is the length of the longest chord in a circle of radius 5 units? 
Is there a smallest chord?
3.	 The locus of points at a given distance from a given point is a circle. 
What can we say about the locus of points equidistant from two given 
points?
(Hint: We know that any point that is equidistant from two given points 
A and B lies on the perpendicular bisector of AB. Does this make the 
perpendicular bisector the locus? For this, we have to show that all the 
points on the perpendicular bisector are equidistant from A and B.)
5.3 How Many Circles?
Now that we have defined a circle and listed some of its properties, let 
us ask this question: Given two points A and B on a plane, how many 
circles pass through A and B? 
If a circle passes through A and B, it has a centre, say O. The lengths 
OA and OB are equal. Is there another point with this property? Yes, 
the midpoint of segment AB. With the midpoint as centre, a circle 
passing through A and B can be drawn. Its radius is half the length of 
AB, and AB is a diameter. 

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
95
Are there more circles passing through both A and B? Clearly, any 
point equidistant from A and B can be the centre of a circle passing 
through A and B. Do you know of such points? We have seen that the 
perpendicular bisector of the line segment AB is the locus of points 
equidistant from A and B. Every point on the perpendicular bisector 
is equidistant from A and B, and every point that is equidistant from 
A and B is on the perpendicular bisector! So, the centres of all circles 
through A and B lie on the perpendicular bisector of AB.
J
K
D
L
C
B
A
Fig. 5.4: Circles through two points
In Fig. 5.4, we see 
circles 
through 
points 
A and B, and through 
C 
and 
D, 
and 
the 
perpendicular bisector of 
CD. Every point on the 
perpendicular 
bisector 
is the centre of a circle 
passing through C and 
D. So we have circles 
with centres K, J and L 
containing points C and D.
Think and Reflect
1.	 How many circles pass through two points on a plane? 
2.	 Are there circles of all possible radii passing through A and B? What is 
the radius of the smallest circle passing through A and B? What is the 
radius of the largest circle passing through A and B?
3.	 As you move away from segment AB along its perpendicular bisector, 
do the radii of the circles containing A and B increase or decrease?
4.	 As you go along the perpendicular bisector, will the circle drawn from 
that point through A and B appear more curved or less curved?
5.	 You are given two points A and B on a plane. How many squares 
can you draw on the same plane with A and B on the boundary? 
How many squares can you draw on the plane with A and B as the 
corners of the square? 

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
96
It is natural to ask: How many circles can you draw through three 
distinct points A, B and C on a plane? Is there always at least one such 
circle? Not necessarily! What if A, B and C lie on a straight line, i.e., are 
collinear? Can you explain why, in this case, there is no circle through 
A, B and C?
Let us assume that A, B and C are not collinear. Is there always a 
circle passing through A, B and C?  Can there be more than one circle 
through A, B and C?
Theorem 1: There is a unique circle passing through three 
non-collinear points.
Why is this true? If there is a circle that passes through non-collinear 
A, B and C, the circle must have a centre. Let’s call that centre O (we will 
discover O soon). 
Since OA = OB, we know that O lies on the perpendicular bisector of AB. 
Since OA = OC, we know that O lies on the perpendicular bisector of 
AC as well. 
But A, B and C are not collinear. So, the perpendicular bisectors of 
AB and AC will intersect at a unique point, since two intersecting lines 
meet at exactly one point on the plane. That point must be O. 
Using O as the centre we can draw a circle with radius equal to the 
length of OA. That will pass through A, B and C. This explains why the 
statement is true. 
Now three non-collinear points also determine a triangle. What we 
have described above is the construction of a circle that passes through 
the vertices of the triangle.
Perpendicular bisector of BC
A
B
C
O
Perpendicular bisector of AC
Perpendicular bisector of AB
Fig. 5.5: The circumcircle of triangle ABC

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
97
The centre O of the circle that passes through the vertices A, B and 
C of ΔABC is called the circumcentre of ΔABC (Fig. 5.5). The circle 
is called the circumcircle and is said to circumscribe the triangle. 
Conversely, the triangle is said to be inscribed in the circle. Since, the 
intersection of the perpendicular bisectors of AB and BC is a single 
point, there is just one such circle for a given triangle. Further, for an 
acute-angled triangle, the circumcentre lies inside the triangle (see 
Fig. 5.5). For an obtuse-angled triangle, the circumcentre lies outside 
the triangle (Fig. 5.6). And for a right-angled triangle, the circumcentre 
lies at the midpoint of the hypotenuse (Fig. 5.7).
Perpendicular bisector of BC
A
B
C
O
Perpendicular bisector of AC
Perpendicular bisector of AB
Fig. 5.6: Obtuse-angled triangle: Circumcentre O is outside the triangle
Perpendicular bisector of BC
A
B
C
O
Perpendicular bisector of AC
Perpendicular bisector of AB
Fig. 5.7: Right-angled triangle: Circumcentre O is at the  
midpoint of the hypotenuse

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
98
Exercise Set 5.1
	 1.	 Draw ΔABC with AB = 5 cm, ∠A = 70° and ∠B = 60°. Draw the 
circumcircle of ΔABC. Is the centre inside or outside the triangle? 
	 2.	 Draw ΔABC with AB = 5 cm, ∠A = 100°, AC = 4 cm. Draw the 
circumcircle of ΔABC. Is the centre inside or outside the triangle?
	 3.	 Draw ΔABC, with AB = 6 cm, BC = 7 cm and CA = 7 cm. Draw 
the circumcircle of ΔABC. Let the circumcentre be O. Measure OA, 
OB, OC. 
	 4.	 What is the least possible radius of a circle through two points A 
and B?
Think, Draw and Infer 
	 1.	 A, B and C are three collinear points. Can you find a point P such 
that PA = PB = PC ? What can you say about the perpendicular 
bisectors of AB and BC? Draw and check. Can you show that for 
three collinear points A, B and C, the perpendicular bisector of 
AB and BC are parallel? Is it possible for a circle to pass through 
collinear points? Can you draw a line that cuts a given circle in 
three distinct points?
	 2.	 The circumcircle of a given ΔABC is drawn. Can there be other 
triangles congruent to ΔABC that share the same circumcircle?
5.4 Chords and the Angles They Subtend
You may want to know when 4 points lie on the same circle. That will 
have to wait till the end of this chapter. We need to do some more work 
to get there.
Fig. 5.8: Chords and radii
Tie a thread at two points on 
a wheel; pull it tight (Fig. 5.8). 
The thread can be thought of as 
a chord of the wheel (a circle). 
Imagine joining the end points of 
the thread to the centre. The thread 
subtends an angle at the centre. Now, 
rotate the wheel. The thread rotates 
around the centre along with the 
wheel.

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
99
In the new position, the thread is another chord on the circle. 
What is common to the first and second chords? They have the 
same length, equal to the length of the thread. What about the angle 
subtended by the second chord at the centre? It must surely be the 
same as the angle subtended by the first chord at the centre. We now 
explain why this is true.
Theorem 2: Equal chords of a circle subtend equal angles at the centre 
of the circle.
What does the theorem say? It talks of two chords of the circle with 
equal length. In geometry, it always helps to draw a figure! (See Fig. 5.9). 
AB and DE are chords of the same length. We need to explain why ∠ACB 
is equal to ∠DCE. What are we given? AB = DE. 
To explain why two angles in two different triangles are equal, we 
use congruence of triangles. If the angles which we want to show equal 
are corresponding angles, then our task would be done!
B
C
A
D
E
Fig. 5.9
Given: AB = DE.
To show: ∠ACB = ∠DCE. 
Why is this true? First, we see that 
CA = CB = r, the radius of the circle. 
Also, CD = CE = r. So, CA = CD and CB = CE.
But AB = DE is given! By the SSS congruence, 
∆CAB is congruent to ∆CDE. So, ∠ACB is 
equal to ∠DCE, i.e., the angles subtended 
at the centre are equal. 
Now suppose we have two chords that subtend equal angles at the 
centre. Are the chords equal? What does our intuition tell us? Let the 
chords be AB and DE. Let us use our imagination. Assume that B, A, E, 
and D are located clockwise on the circle as shown in Fig 5.10.
B
C
b = 54°
a = 54°
A
D
E
Fig. 5.10
Imagine you are standing at the centre C 
of a circle. Stretch your arms so that they are 
at a certain angle. Let your arms intersect the 
circle at A, B. The distance between your arm 
ends must be the length of chord AB. Now let 
the floor rotate magically. You start rotating 
(say clockwise) about C. Don’t change the 
angle your arms make! At some point your 
left arm meets point E. 

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
100
Where will your right hand be? It should be at D, should it not? 
That is because we assumed that angles ACB and DCF are equal, and 
you have not moved your hands. The distance between the ends of 
your arms must be the length of DE as well. Let us now explain why 
this is true.
Theorem 3: Chords of a circle that subtend equal angles at the centre 
are equal.
Let us draw the figure, as in Fig. 5.11.
B
C
A
D
E
Fig. 5.11
Given: ∠ACB = ∠DCE. 
To show: AB = ED. 
Why is this true? We see that 
AC = BC = the radius of the circle. 
Likewise, EC = DC = the radius. 
So, AC = DC and BC = EC. 
Since, ∠ACB = ∠DCE, by the SAS 
congruence, ∆ACB ≅ ∆DCE. Hence, 
AB = ED. 
Exercise Set 5.2
	 1.	 Show that the triangle formed by a chord and the centre of the 
circle is isosceles.
	 2.	 Show that if two such isosceles triangles (occurring in the 
previous question) have equal base length, they are congruent to 
each other.
5.5 Midpoints and Perpendicular Bisectors of Chords
We will explore more properties of chords. Do we get something 
special when we draw a line segment from the centre of a circle to the 
midpoint of a chord? What if we draw the perpendicular bisector of a 
chord? Does it pass through a special point?

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
101
Theorem 4: The line joining the centre of a circle and the midpoint of 
a chord of the circle is perpendicular to the chord.
C
B
A
M
Fig. 5.12
Let us see why this is true. Draw a 
circle with centre C (Fig. 5.12). Draw 
any chord AB. Let M be the midpoint 
of AB. We must show that CM is 
perpendicular to AB.
Explanation:  CAB is an isosceles 
triangle. AB is the base and CA = CB. 
So, ∠A = ∠B. 
M is the midpoint of AB. So, 
AM = BM. 
By the SAS congruence, ∆ CMA is 
congruent to ∆ CMB. So, ∠CMB = ∠CMA.
But ∠CMB + ∠CMA = 180° (angles on 
a line).
So, both angles are 90°. That is, CM 
is perpendicular to AB. 
Exercise Set 5.3
	 1.	 Can you explain why the converse to Theorem 4 is true, i.e., why 
does the perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a chord of the 
circle bisect the chord?
	
	 (Hint: Use Fig. 5.12. You are told that ∠CMA = ∠CMB = 90°. You 
need to show that AM = BM.)
	 2.	 An isosceles triangle ABC is inscribed in a circle, with AB = AC. 
Show that the altitude from A to BC passes through the centre of 
the circle.
	 3.	 Two parallel chords of lengths 6 cm and 8 cm are on opposite sides 
of the centre of a circle. If the radius of the circle is 5 cm, find the 
distance between the midpoints of the chords. 

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
102
From Question 1 above, we have the following result. 
Theorem 5: The perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a chord 
of the circle bisects the chord.
5.6 Distance of Chords from the Centre
Activity: Take a paper circle. Fold the circle from the boundary, 
inwards. Open the fold. The crease is now a chord (see Fig. 5.13 B). Now 
fold the paper again, so that the end points of the chord meet. Open the 
fold (see Fig. 5.13 C). 
Fig. 5.13 A
Fig. 5.13 B
Fig. 5.13 C
Measure the lengths of the parts into which the chord is divided. 
The chord gets bisected where the folds intersect. Measure the 
angle between the creases. The crease of the second fold is along the 
perpendicular from the centre to the chord. Measure the distance from 
the centre to the midpoint of the chord. It is the distance from the centre 
to the chord.
Now draw another chord of the same length. How will you do this? 
We will let you figure this out yourself. Join the centre to the midpoint 
of the new chord and measure its length. Is it the same as distance from 
the centre to the first chord? 
Now take a tracing paper and draw a circle on it with the same 
radius. Place the circle on the tracing paper on top of the circle paper 
so that the circles overlap. Trace the chord on the circle paper, and the 
perpendicular to it from its centre, onto the tracing paper circle. Now 
rotate the tracing paper. You will see the chord through the tracing 
paper — it looks like a different chord of the same length on the circle 
paper. 
The circle is a symmetric figure. So, rotating the circle around its 
centre does not change the circle. As we rotate the circle, our chosen 
chord will also rotate, to give a new chord of the same length. Along 
with it, the perpendicular from the centre to the chord also moves! 
Equal chords appear to be equidistant from the centre.

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
103
Is this a totally convincing explanation? No, we have only given 
examples where our guess holds true. A statement may be true on a 
large number of examples, but it does not mean the statement is true in 
general. So let us explain why the statement is true.
Theorem 6: Chords of a circle having the same length are all at the 
same distance from the centre of the circle.
Draw the figure (Fig. 5.14).
E
D
C
G
B
H
F
A
Fig. 5.14
Given: 
Circle 
with 
centre 
C; 
AB = FG; E, H are midpoints of AB, 
FG respectively.
To show: CE = CH.
Why is this true? From Theorem 5, 
CE and CH are the perpendiculars 
from C to the chords AB and FG 
respectively.   
So, CE and CH are the distances from the centre C to the chords AB 
and FG respectively.  
We shall explain this result in two different ways. 
(1) Triangles CAB and CFG are congruent.
CA = CF (both are equal to the radius of the circle). Likewise, CB = CG. 
We are given that AB = FG. So, by the SSS congruence,  ∆CAB ≅ ∆CFG.
Hence the altitudes of the congruent triangles are congruent. 
CE = CH. Therefore, the chords AB and FG are equidistant from the 
centre C. 
(2) Consider triangles CEA and CHF. 
From Theorem 5, the perpendicular from the centre bisects the 
chord.
Hence, E and H are the midpoints of the chords AB and FG 
respectively.

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
104
AE = FH (since AB = FG, and E and H are midpoints of AB and FG).
∠CEA = ∠CHF = 90°.
CF = CA, as they are radii of the circle.
By the RHS congruence, ∆CEA ≅ ∆CHF.
So, CE = CH. Thus the chords of equal length are equidistant from 
the centre. 
Exercise Set 5.4
	 1.	 Use the Baudhāyana–Pythagoras theorem to show why Theorem 
6 must be true.
	 2.	 Consider Fig. 5.15. If CE is perpendicular 
to AB, CH is perpendicular to GH, and CE 
= CH, show that AB = GF.
	 3.	 Solve the previous question using the 
Baudhāyana–Pythagoras theorem.
Question 
2 
in 
the 
exercise 
above 
establishes the following result.
Theorem 7: Chords of a circle that are 
equidistant from the centre have equal length.
5.6.1 Which of the two unequal chords is farther from the 
centre?
You have two chords on a circle. One is longer than the other. Which 
chord is closer to the centre? Can you guess?
Activity:  Draw a circle. Draw chords of various lengths. Drop a 
perpendicular to each chord from the centre. Record the length of the 
chord and its distance from the centre in a table.
Table 1
Length of Chord
 
Distance from Centre
Fig. 5.15
E
C
G
B
H
F
A

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
105
What do you observe? The longer the chord, the closer it is to the 
centre. Let us try to understand why this is true.
Theorem 8: Let AB and DE be two chords of a circle with centre C. 
Suppose AB > DE. Then the distance from C to AB is less than the distance 
from C to DE.
As always, we draw the figure. Remember: by ‘distance from C to 
AB’ we mean the perpendicular distance. So, we drop perpendiculars 
CF and CG from C to AB and DE, respectively.  
E
D
G
B
F
A
C
Fig. 5.16
Given: AB > DE.  
To show that: CF < CG. 
Why is this true? In Fig. 5.16, both 
AC and CD are radii. So, AC = CD. By 
the Baudha¯yana–Pythagoras Theorem, 
CD2 = CG2 + GD2 and AC2 = CF2 + AF2.
So, CF2 + AF2  = CG2  + GD2.         
Now AB is greater than DE. So AF is 
greater than GD (because F and G are 
the midpoints of AB and DE).
Since AF2 > GD2 we have CF2 < CG2. 
So, CF < CG.     
Comment: The chord nearest to the centre is the chord containing 
the centre. Its distance to C is zero! So the diameter is the greatest 
chord. 
If one pushes the chord away from the centre, at some stage the 
chord becomes a single point, its length is zero, and the distance of C 
from this chord is the radius.
Exercise Set 5.5
	 1.	 Find the length of the chord of a circle where the radius is 7 cm 
and perpendicular distance is 6 cm.
	 2.	 Explain why the following statement is true: If the perpendicular 
distance of a chord from the centre is d and the radius is r, then the 
chord length is 2
2
2
r
d
−
.

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
106
	*3.	 In a circle, if the distance of chord AB from the centre is twice 
the distance of another chord CD from the centre, then can we 
conclude that CD = 2 AB? Give reasons for your answer.
5.7 Angles Subtended by an Arc
An arc of a circle is a connected portion of the circle. It is defined by 
two points on the circle, called the end points of the arc, and the curve 
connecting them along the circle’s edge. 
B
O
Y
X
A
Fig. 5.17: Major arc AYB and minor 
arc AXB                                             
Look at Fig. 5.17. A and B are two 
points on the circle. There are two 
ways of going from A to B. One goes 
via point X and one goes via point Y. 
The bigger of the two is called the 
major arc, and the smaller of the two 
is called the minor arc.
We 
define 
the 
angle 
subtended by the arc AB at 
the centre to be the measure 
of the angle AOB, as we sweep 
along the arc — so we move 
from OA to OB along the arc and 
measure 
the 
angle 
swept. 
The minor arc subtends the 
∠AOB — here you move from 
OA to OB via X. The major arc 
subtends the angle we get as 
we move from OA to OB via Y 
(see Fig. 5.18).
X
B
A
O
Y
Fig. 5.18

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
107
Exercise: A circle with centre 
O is drawn, and A, B, C, D are 
points on the circle (see  Fig. 5.19). 
Measure the angles subtended 
by arc AKB and arc CLD at the 
centre O. If the angle at the centre 
is less than 180°, it is a minor arc. 
If the angle at the centre is greater 
than 180°, it is a major arc. State 
whether arcs AKB and CLD are 
minor arcs or major arcs.
L
O
C
B
K
A
D
Fig. 5.19
5.7.1 Angle subtended by an arc at a point on the circle 
outside the arc
By ʻangle subtended by arc AXB at a point on the circle outside the arcʼ 
we mean the angle ACB where C is any point on the circle but not 
on arc AXB. Remarkably, the measure of this angle does not depend 
upon which specific point C we pick, so long as it is on the circle and 
outside the arc!
Activity: Draw a circle and a chord AB. 
Fix an arc AKB formed by AB and a point 
K between A, B on the circle. Measure the 
angle subtended at the centre by arc AKB. 
Take three points P, Q, R on the circle outside 
arc AKB. Measure the angles subtended 
by arc AKB at points P, Q, R. What do you 
notice?
Repeat this activity for a different arc 
AKB. Based on this activity, we can make a 
statement about the angles subtended by an 
arc of a circle at the centre and at a point 
of the circle outside the arc. We shall show 
that the following is true.
Fig. 5.20
A
P
Q
R
B
K
O

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
108
Theorem 9: The angle subtended by an arc at the centre of the circle 
is double the angle subtended by the arc at any point on the circle outside 
the arc.
B
A
E
C
F
D
Fig. 5.21: Angle subtended  
by arc AFB
Given: AFB is an arc. ∠ACB is the angle 
subtended by arc AFB at centre C. D is a 
point on the circle outside arc AFB (see 
Fig. 5.21). 
We will assume for now that D is 
such that DC when extended cuts the 
circle at some point E on arc AFB, as 
shown. 
We will consider the other case 
later.
To show: ∠BCA = 2 ∠BDA.
Why is this true? Join D to C and extend DC to cut the 
circle at a point E on arc AFB. Now ∆DCB is isosceles with CB = CD. 
So, ∠CBD = ∠CDB.
∠BCE is the exterior angle of ∆BCD. By the exterior angle theorem,
∠BCE = ∠CBD + ∠CDB = 2 ∠BDC.
Similarly, ∆ADC is an isosceles triangle with CA = CD. 
So, 	
∠CAD = ∠CDA
∠ACE is the exterior angle of ∆ADC. By the exterior angle theorem,
∠ACE = ∠CAD + ∠CDA = 2 ∠CDA.
Now ∠BCA = ∠BCE + ∠ECA, and ∠BDA = ∠BDE + ∠EDA.
Hence	
∠BCA = 2 (∠BDC + ∠CDA) = 2 ∠BDA.
So,	
∠BCA = 2 ∠BDA.
The explanation we have given does not work if the situation is 
as shown in Fig. 5.22, where the extension of DC meets the circle at 
a point E outside the arc AFB. We must rework the explanation for 
this case.

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
109
B
A
E
C
F
D
Fig 5.22: Angle subtended  
by arc AFB
Given: AFB is an arc. ∠ACB is the angle 
subtended by arc AFB at centre C. 
D is a point on the circle outside arc 
AFB such that when we extend DC it 
cuts the circle at some point E outside 
the arc AFB, as shown (Fig. 5.22). 
We shall again make use of the 
properties of isosceles triangles.
∠ACE = ∠ADC + ∠CAD = 2 ∠ADC, since CA = CD (and so ∠ADC = ∠CAD).
Similarly, ∠BCE = ∠BDC + ∠CBD = 2 ∠BDC.
Also, ∠ACB = ∠ACE – ∠BCE, and ∠ADB = ∠ADC – ∠BDC.
Hence ∠ACB = 2 ∠ADB. 
X
B
D
F
C
A
E
Fig. 5.23: Angles subtended  
by an arc are equal
Something very interesting comes 
out of this. This is what the activity 
before Theorem 9 suggested. Take 
an arc AB. Decide how you want to 
go from A to B along the arc. Take 
any point D on the circle, outside 
arc AB. 
Then, no matter where D is, so 
long as it is outside the arc and on 
the circle, ∠ADB is the same!
Let us understand this better using Fig. 5.23. Consider the arc of the 
circle going from A to B via X. The points on the circle outside this arc 
are points you cross as you go from A to B via E. The angle subtended 
by AXB at the centre is the angle swept by CA as we move from CA to 
CB via X. Points E, F and D are all not on AXB. The theorem tells us that 
∠AEB = ∠ADB = ∠AFB = 1
2 ∠ACB. 

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
110
Corollary: The angle subtended by a diameter at any point on the circle 
is 90°. 
Corollary: A corollary is a fact that follows immediately from an 
already proved result.
B
D
A
C
Fig. 5.24
Why is this true? Let AB be a diameter 
(Fig. 5.24). We must show that ∠ADB 
is 90°. The arc from A to B we take is 
the arc not containing D. What is the 
angle subtended by that arc at C? We 
have to move from A along that arc till 
we reach B. So, the angle subtended 
is ∠ACB, a straight angle, 180°. Hence, 
∠ADB = 1
2 ∠ACB = 90°.
A
C
H
E
G
D
F
I
B
Fig. 5.25: Points and the chord
This fact that the angles in the 
same arc segment are all equal is a 
beautiful fact that distinguishes the 
circle from all other shapes. 
In Fig. 5.25, the angles that arc AB 
subtends at the points F, G outside 
the circle are different. For the points 
inside the circle, ∠AIB, ∠ACB and 
∠AHB are all different. But for all 
points P on arc AB, the subtended 
angles are the same. Thus, for points 
D, E, ∠ADB = ∠AEB.
Exercise Set 5.6
	 1.	 In a circle with centre O, the central angle AOB is 60°. If the radius 
of the circle is 12 cm, what is the length of the chord AB?

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
111
	 2.	 Let A and B be two points on a circle with centre O. 
	
(i)	
Are there points X, Y on the circle, on the same side of AB, 
such that ∠AXB is different from ∠AYB? 
	
(ii)	
Is it true that if ∠AXB = ∠AYB, then X 
and Y lie on the same side of the circle?
	
(iii)	
If ∠AXB = ∠AYB, and X and Y do not lie 
on the circle, does the circle through 
A, B and X also pass through Y?
	 3.	 Find x in Fig. 5.26.
5.8 Concyclicity of Points
Now we address the question about when 4 points lie on the same 
circle. And we will let you explore the question for 5 points, 6 points 
and so on! We call points that are on the same circle concyclic. 
Theorem 10: If a line segment AB joining two points A, B subtends 
equal angles at two other points C, D that lie on the same side of AB, then 
the four points lie on a circle.
As always we draw the picture first. 
Given: Consider segment AB. Points C and D lie on the same side of 
AB; points C and D are not on the line AB; and ∠ACB = ∠ADB.
To show: A, B, C, D lie on the same circle.
Why is this true? The points A, B, C are noncollinear points. So, 
using Theorem 1, there is a circle passing through A, B, C.
Let us show that D also lies on that circle. For this, let us draw the 
circle through A, B and C. 
Suppose D is not on the circle; then it is either inside or outside the 
circle. Join AD.
A
C
E
B
D
A
C
D
B
E
Fig. 5.27 A
Fig. 5.27 B
100°
x
A
B
C
D
Fig. 5.26

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
112
If D is outside the circle, then AD intersects the circle at E; see 
Fig. 5.27 A. If D is inside the circle, extend AD to meet the circle at E; 
see Fig. 5.27 B. Now C, E are on the same segment of the arc formed by 
chord AB. So, ∠ACB = ∠AEB. 
If D were outside the circle, then ∠AEB is an exterior angle of 
the ∆BED, so ∠AEB > ∠ADB. Also, ∠AEB = ∠ACB (angles in the same 
segment of a circle), and ∠ACB = ∠ADB (given). This leads to ∠ACB being 
greater than itself, which is obviously not possible. 
If D were inside as in Fig. 5.27 B, then ∠ADB is an exterior angle of 
BED. In the same way that we argued above, we reach an impossible 
conclusion.
So, we must eliminate both of these options (D being outside the 
circle and D being inside the circle). So, D must be on the circle passing 
through A, B, C. In other words, A, B, C, D are concyclic. 
When the vertices of a quadrilateral (which we also call a 4-gon) are 
concyclic, the quadrilateral is called a cyclic quadrilateral.  
We use this to show another nice property of circles!
Theorem 11: The sum of two opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral 
is 180°. 
B
A
O
C
D
Fig. 5.28
Given: A, B, C, D are the vertices 
of a cyclic 4-gon (Fig. 5.28). This 
means that there is a circle 
passing through A, B, C, D. Let its 
centre be O.
To show: ∠BAD + ∠BCD = 180°.
How shall we show that this is true? Consider arc BCD; point A is on 
the circle and it lies outside the arc BCD. So ∠BAD is half the angle that 
arc BCD subtends at the centre O. Since we move from OB to OD along 
C, this is the reflex angle BOD (dotted). So, ∠BAD = 1
2 (reflex angle BOD).

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
113
Similarly, ∠BCD is half the angle subtended by the arc BAD at O. 
This is the angle denoted by the double arc BOD. Since C is on arc BCD, 
we need to move from OB to OD via A. So, ∠BCD = 1
2 (∠BOD).
So, ∠BAD + ∠BCD = 1
2 (complete angle at the centre O)
A complete rotation at O is 360°. 
Hence, ∠BAD + ∠BCD = 1
2 × (360°) = 180°. 
So, the opposite angles of a cyclic 4-gon add up to 180°.
The converse of this theorem also holds.
Exercise: A cyclic quadrilateral has angles measuring ∠A = 80°, 
∠B = 110°, ∠C = 100°, and ∠D = 70°. Can such a quadrilateral be drawn? 
Explain why or why not.
Theorem 12: If two opposite angles of a quadrilateral add up to 
180°, then the vertices of the quadrilateral lie on a circle, i.e., they are 
concyclic. 
B
A
O
C
E
D
Fig. 5.29
Given: ABCD is a 4-gon (Fig. 5.29). 
∠BAD + ∠BCD = 180°.
∠ABC + ∠CDA =180°.
To show that: ABCD is cyclic.
Why is this true? Suppose ABCD is not 
cyclic. Since A, D, B are not collinear, 
there is a circle passing through the 
three points. If that circle does not 
pass through C, there are two cases: C 
is outside or C is inside the circle.
We deal only with the first case and leave the other to the reader. 
Let E be the point where CD meets the circle (see Fig. 5.29). Then 
ABED is a cyclic 4-gon. So from Theorem 11, ∠BAD + ∠BED = 180°. 
We are also given ∠BAD + ∠DCB = 180°.
So ∠BCD = ∠BED. But this is not possible as ∠BED is the exterior 
angle of  BEC and hence greater than ∠BCE, i.e., greater than ∠BCD. 
So, points A, B, C, D all lie on a circle. 

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
114
The circle is a beautiful and tantalising shape. After mastering 
these basic properties, you will get a feel for the symmetries of a circle 
and the properties of chords, the angles they subtend, the distances of 
chords from the centre, and angles subtended by arcs at the centre. 
Next year you will study many more interesting and beautiful such 
results about circles. Stay tuned — the best is yet to come!
End-of-Chapter Exercises
	
1.	 In a circle, a chord is 5 cm away from the centre. If the radius of 
the circle is 13 cm, what is the length of the chord?
	
2.	 An arc of a circle subtends an angle of 70° at the centre. What is 
the measure of the angle subtended by the arc at a point on the 
circle?
	
3.	 The diameter of a circle is 26 cm. A chord of length 24 cm is 
drawn in the circle. Find the distance from the centre of the circle 
to the chord.
	
4.	 A circle has a radius of 15 cm. A chord is drawn. The distance 
from the centre of the circle to the chord is 9 cm. What is the 
length of the chord?
	
5.	 Prove that the perpendicular bisector of a chord passes through 
the centre of the circle.
	
6.	 The diameter of a circle is AB. Point C is on the circumference. 
What is the measure of the ∠ACB? Explain your reasoning.
	
7.	 ABCD is a cyclic quadrilateral inscribed in a circle. If ∠A 
measures 75°, what is the measure of ∠C? If ∠B measures 110°, 
what is the measure of ∠D?
	
8.	 Quadrilateral PQRS is inscribed in a circle. If ∠P = (2x + 10)° 
and ∠R = (3x − 20)°, find the value of x and the measures of 
∠P and ∠R.
	
9.	 The distance of a chord of length 16 cm from the centre of a 
circle is 6 cm. Find the radius of the circle.
	 10.	 A cyclic quadrilateral has sides 5, 5, 12, 12 units. Find its area.
	*11.	 Consider a cyclic quadrilateral. Without drawing its circumcircle, 
how can we find out whether the centre of the circumcircle lies 

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
115
inside the quadrilateral or outside? What is the best way of 
finding out?
	*12.	 When two chords intersect, each of them is divided into two 
line segments. Show that if the intersecting chords are of equal 
length, then the line segments of one chord are equal to the 
corresponding line segments of the other chord.
	*13.	 Draw a circle in which a chord of 6 cm length stands at a 
distance of 3 cm from the centre. 
	
	 (Hint: Is it a circumcircle of a suitable triangle?)
	*14.	 Show that rectangle is the only parallelogram that can be 
inscribed in a circle.
	*15.	 Show that if a rectangle is inscribed in a circle, then the point of 
intersection of its diagonals must lie at the centre of the circle.
	*16.	 Consider all chords of a circle of a fixed length. What is the 
shape formed by the midpoints of all these chords?
	*17.	 In a circle with centre O, chords AB and AC are congruent. Explain 
why this statement is true: “The centre of the circle lies on the 
angle bisector of ∠BAC”.
	 18.	 Two parallel chords of lengths 10 cm and 24 cm are on the same 
side of the centre of a circle. The distance between the chords is 
7 cm. Find the radius of the circle.
	*19.	 A regular hexagon is inscribed in a circle of radius r. Find the 
length of the sides of the hexagon and the distance of each side 
from the centre of the circle.
	 20.	 A quadrilateral MNOP is inscribed in a circle. If MN is a 
diameter, what can you say about ∠MOP and ∠MNP? Explain 
your reasoning.
	 21.	 Let ABCD be a cyclic quadrilateral. Explain why the exterior 
angle at any vertex is equal to the interior opposite angle 
(e.g., ∠CDE = ∠ABC, where E is a point on the extension of 
side CD).
	*22.	 “There is no chord of a circle that is longer than its diameter.” 
How do you justify this statement?
	*23.	 Let A be any point within a given circle with centre O. Show that 
the shortest chord of the circle that passes through point A is the 
one that is perpendicular to OA.

Ganita Manjari |Grade 9| Part I
116
	 24.	 How would you use the following figure to justify the statement 
that the angle in a semicircle is 90°?
b
a
O
A
Fig. 5.30
	 *25.	 In a circle, two chords CC' and DD' are drawn perpendicular to a 
diameter AB. Prove that the segment MM' joining the midpoints 
of the chords CD and C' D' is perpendicular to AB.
	 *26.	 How would you use the following figure to justify the statement 
that the sum of the opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral 
is 180°?
B
A
O
C
D
v
p
q
u
Fig. 5.31
Chapter Summary 
•	
A circle is the set of all points in a plane that lie at a given 
distance (the radius) from a fixed point called its centre. 
•	
A circle has reflection symmetry across any diameter. 

I’m Up and Down, and Round and Round
117
•	
A circle has rotational symmetry about its centre, through any 
angle. 
•	
Infinitely many circles can be drawn through two given points. 
The centres of these circles lie on the perpendicular bisector of 
the line segment joining the two given points. 
•	
Given any three points not on a straight line, a unique circle 
can be drawn through them; it is called the circumcircle of the 
triangle whose vertices are the three given points. The centre 
of this circle is called the circumcentre of the three points, lies 
at the intersection of the perpendicular bisectors of the line 
segments joining the points. 
•	
Equal chords subtend equal angles at the centre of the circle. 
Conversely, if two chords subtend equal angles at the centre, the 
chords are equal in length.​
•	
A line drawn from the centre to the midpoint of a chord is 
perpendicular to that chord. Conversely, a perpendicular from 
the centre to a chord bisects it.​
•	
Chords of equal length lie at equal distance from the centre. 
Conversely, chords that lie at the same distance from the centre 
are equal in length. 
•	
Given two unequal chords, the longer chord is closer to the 
centre.​
•	
The angle subtended by an arc at the centre of a circle is twice 
the angle it subtends at any point on the remaining part of 
the circle.​
•	
The angle subtended by a diameter at any point on the circle 
is 90°.​
•	
If a line segment between two points subtends equal angles at 
two other points on the same side of the segment, all four points 
lie on a single circle (i.e., the points are concyclic).​
•	
A quadrilateral inscribed in a circle is called cyclic. In a cyclic 
quadrilateral, the sum of opposite pairs of angles is 180°. 
Conversely, if two opposite angles of a quadrilateral add up to 
180°, then it is a cyclic quadrilateral.​
