Tissues in Action
Life begins when a single cell divides itself several times to give 
rise to a large number of cells. These cells gradually form the skin 
(protection), muscles (movement), bones (support), nerves (control 
and coordination), and all other organs. This process is so intricate 
that it is considered one of nature’s greatest engineering marvels. 
Researchers have been trying to understand, replicate and modify this 
process for human welfare. To do so, it is essential to understand the 
natural biological processes that govern growth and development in 
plants and animals. What makes cells group together to form tissues? 
Why do some tissues grow throughout life while others do not?
In Chapter 2, Cell: The Building Block of Life, you have learnt that 
the cell is the basic unit of life. Many cells come together to form a 
multicellular organism. In all multicellular organisms, there is a 
hierarchy of organisation. Cells of similar type performing similar 
function group together to form a tissue, more than one type of tissues 
form organs, different organs form organ systems and organ systems 
form an organism. In unicellular organisms, such as amoeba, a single 
cell performs all functions of life. In multicellular organisms like plants 
and animals, different groups of cells perform different functions. A 
tissue is a group of cells (similar in structure) that work together to 
perform a specific function. The formation of different types of tissues 
leads to the division of labour, which increases the efficiency of the 
body and enables it to carry out complex life processes. For example, 
Think It Over
	y
How is the study 
of cells and tissues 
significant for 
understanding the 
life processes and 
human welfare?
	y
How are tissues in 
plants and animals 
different, and why?
	y
How is the 
division of labour 
at various levels 
of organisation 
in multicellular 
organisms 
correlated with 
their structure and 
function?
Chapter 
3

Tissues in Action
29
in animals, muscle tissue enables movement and nervous tissue carries 
messages to different parts of the body. In plants, conducting tissues, such as 
xylem transports water and minerals, while phloem transports food.
3.1 Why are Plant and Animal Tissues Different?
In Chapter 2, Cell: The Building Block of Life, you compared plant 
and animal cells, and studied the major differences between them. 
Most plants are fixed in one place and do not move from place to 
place like animals. They need support to stay firm and upright. 
Plant cells have a cell wall that provides rigidity and strength. In 
general, animals can move (although some, such as sponges, are 
immobile). Without a rigid cell wall, animal cells can change shape 
easily. This cellular flexibility eventually helps make their bodies 
suitable for locomotion.
Another major difference between plants and animals is their 
mode of nutrition. Animals have tissues that help them digest 
food obtained from different food sources, while plants have 
tissues that help them utilise solar energy for synthesising the 
food components through photosynthesis. Plants and animals 
have distinct tissues for transporting food and water to different 
parts of the body. The growth patterns  in plants and animals also 
vary because the tissues responsible for growth differ in structure 
and function. In this chapter, we will learn how the structures of 
plant and animal tissues relate to their specific functions.
3.2 Tissues for Growth in Plants
You must have observed that a small seedling grows into a tall 
tree, roots grow deep into the soil, stems become thicker with 
time and grass grows again after being eaten by grazing animals. 
Which tissues are responsible for these changes?
Plants grow in different ways —
	y increase in length (height of stem and depth of roots),
	y increase in girth (thickness of stem), and
	y regrowth after cutting the branches or grazing by animals.
This growth require actively dividing cells that together form a tissue 
called a meristematic tissue.
Let us explore different kinds of meristematic tissues.
3.2.1. Apical meristem — How do plants grow in length?
Let us study the growth of roots in an onion bulb.
Activity 3.1: Let us design experiments
1.	 Take two glass jars or couplin jars and fill them with water.
2.	 Now, take two onion bulbs and place one in each jar, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
3.	 Observe the growth of roots in both bulbs for a few days.
4.	 Measure the length of roots on days 1, 2 and 3.
5.	 On day 3, cut the root tips of the onion bulb in Jar B by about 1 cm. After 
this, observe the growth of roots in both the jars, measure their lengths 
Fig. 3.1: Experimental 
set-up to observe the 
growth of roots
(a) Jar A
(b) Jar B
Meet a Scientist
B. G. L. 
Swamy was 
a renowned 
Indian 
botanist 
known 
for his 
contributions to the area 
of plant morphology and 
anatomy. His book, 
Hasuru Honnu, is a 
popular book in 
Kannada language. It is 
a blend of science, satire 
and culture. The book 
describes the botanical 
excursion in the forests 
of Western Ghats and 
is a treasure of plant 
descriptions, utilisation, 
conservation practices, 
botanical folklores and 
myths. The book won the 
Kendra Sahitya Akademi 
Award in 1978.

Exploration|Grade 9
30
shoots to grow in length. Thus, we conclude that plants have growth zones 
at the tips of their roots and shoots, called the apical meristems, which 
help the plants grow in length (Fig. 3.3).
3.2.2 Lateral meristem — How do plants grow in girth?
Look at your surroundings. You must have observed that the stems of dicot 
plants not only grow in length but also increase in diameter or girth over 
time. What causes this increase in girth? One possible explanation may be 
the activity of meristematic tissues. If you have visited 
a timber yard or observed the cut trunk of a tree, you 
may have noticed several ring-like patterns on the 
cut surface of the wood (Fig. 3.4). These are annual 
growth rings. Some annual rings are wide and some 
are narrow, reflecting the favourable or unfavourable 
growth conditions during a particular year. By 
counting these annual rings, scientists can estimate 
the age of a tree and also understand the climatic 
conditions under which it grew. 
for four more days (day 4 onwards), and record your observations in 
Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Experimental data
Experimental 
Jars
Length of onion root (cm) from the base of the bulb
Day 1
Day 2
Day 3
Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Day 7
A
B
What trend do you observe in 
the data you recorded in Table 3.1? 
Are your observations similar to 
those presented in the graphical 
representation (Fig. 3.2)? What do 
you infer?
	y Roots in Jar A continue to grow in 
length.
	y Roots in Jar B stop growing after 
the tips are cut.
This shows that roots grow only 
from their tips. The tips consist of 
cells which divide continuously.
You may recall observing mitosis 
in onion root tips in Chapter 2, Cell: 
The Building Block of Life. This 
observation 
confirms 
that 
root 
tips contain actively dividing cells. 
Similarly, shoot tips also contain 
actively dividing cells that help the 
Fig. 3.4: T.S. of a tree 
trunk showing annual 
growth rings
Fig. 3.3: Location of 
apical meristem in a 
sapling
Shoot apical 
meristem
Root 
apical 
meristem
Days
Fig. 3.2: Growth of onion roots
Length of roots (cm) from 
the base of the bulb
1
0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
2
3
4
5
6
7
Jar B
Jar A

Tissues in Action
31
The increase in girth occurs due to the presence of actively dividing 
cells arranged in a ring in the stem. These cells divide and produce new 
cells inside and outside in a concentric manner, leading to an increase in 
diameter of stem. This meristematic tissue is called the lateral meristem.
3.2.3 Intercalary meristem — How do plants grow after 
being cut?
We have learnt that meristematic tissues are present at the tips of roots 
and shoots. What do you think happens to the growth of the plant if the tip 
of a young stem is cut? The stem stops growing in length but new branches 
arise from the the nodes of stem (Fig. 3.5). The intercalary meristem is 
located at the base of internode or just above the node. The node is point 
on plant stem where branches or leaves arise. The part of stem between 
the two nodes is called internode. You may also have observed that when 
the hedge around a garden is cut, after sometime more branches appear 
again, giving the hedge a bushy appearance. Grass also appear after 
sometime being mowed (Fig. 3.6) and/or grazed by animals. This happens 
because of the presence of intercalary meristem at the nodes of its stem. 
These meristematic tissues are called intercalary meristems.  
Thus, plants have three types of meristematic tissues — apical, lateral 
and intercalary. The apical meristem, located at the root and shoot tips, 
increases its length. The lateral meristem located along the circumference 
of stems increases girth. The intercalary meristem located at the base 
of certain plants, such as grasses, helps them regenerate after cutting. 
Together, these meristems account for growth in length, girth and 
branching in plants.
The cells of the meristematic tissues are small, have thin cell walls, a 
large and prominent nucleus, and dense cytoplasm with many organelles. 
Vacuoles are generally absent and the cells are tightly packed with little or 
no intercellular space. These characteristics of meristematic tissue allow 
them continuous and rapid cell division. Why do you think that the cell of 
meristematic tissues lack vacuoles? 
Due to continuous cell division, meristematic tissue adds new cells to 
the plant body. Some of the newly formed cells remain meristematic while 
others lose the ability to divide. The cells that loose the ability to divide 
undergo changes in structure and function, and become permanent 
tissues. These cells become specialised to perform specific functions, 
such as support, transport or storage. This process, by which meristematic 
tissue becomes specialised to perform specific functions, is called 
differentiation. Meristemetic tissue becomes permanent by the process 
of differentiation. 
3.2.4 Permanent tissues 
Examine the Transverse Section(s) (T.S.) of the root and/or stem, and/
or the Vertical Section (V.S.) of the leaf of any herbaceous plant under a 
microscope. The internal structure of a T.S. of a sunflower stem as seen 
under a microscope is shown in Fig. 3.7. What do you observe? Are all the 
cells similar in shape and size? How many different types of tissues can 
you identify? What differences do you notice among them? What might be 
Fig. 3.5: New branches 
arising from the node 
of a stem
New 
branch
New 
branch
Fig. 3.6: Lawn mowing

Exploration|Grade 9
32
might be the reason for the presence of 
different types of cells and tissues? You can 
see that different groups of cells are present 
in the T.S. of sunflower stem and each tissue 
is specialised to perform a specific function. 
These are permanent tissues. Permanent 
tissues can be simple (composed of only one 
type of cell) or complex (composed of more 
than one types of cells).
Observe the types of tissues given in Fig. 3.7 
based on pointers provided as follows:
(i) Protective tissue — Epidermis
What protects plants from mechanical injury, 
water loss, harmful microorganisms and 
extreme environmental conditions?
The epidermis forms the outermost 
layer of the plant body. It consists of a tightly 
packed, single layer of flat and rectangular 
cells. It protects all parts of the plants. These 
cells are covered with a waxy layer of cutin 
called cuticle. In some plants, living in very 
dry habitat, the epidemis may be covered 
by a thick layer of cuticle to reduce the 
water loss in the process of transpiration by 
stomata. The cuticle also provides protection against mechenical injury 
and invasion by prasites. In many plants, hair-like projections arise from 
epidermal cells. In roots, these projections are called root hair, which 
increase the surface area for absorption of water and minerals from 
the soil. In leaves, the epidermis contains pores called stomata, which 
apart from gaseous exchange helps in transpiration, i.e., evaporation 
of water vapours through stomata. Thus, transpiration helps in water 
transportation by creating a transpiration pull in xylem. Transpiration 
also helps in elimination of wastes from the plant body.
(ii) Supporting tissue — Simple permanent tissues
What keeps a plant upright? Why does a fresh twig bend but a dry twig 
break? Why are seed coats hard and how do aquatic plants float? These 
functions are carried out by supporting tissues. There are three types of 
supporting tissues or simple permanent tissues — parenchyma, collenchyma 
and sclerenchyma. Each differs in structure and performs supporting functions.
a.	Parenchyma
Parenchyma consists of living cells with thin walls (Fig. 3.8a). These cells are 
loosely packed with intercellular spaces. Parenchyma mainly stores food 
but also performs photosynthesis in the green parts of the plants. In aquatic 
plants, specialised parenchyma forms air spaces, which help them float.
b.	Collenchyma
Collenchyma consists of living cells with unevenly thickened corners due 
to pectin (a chemical that gives flexibility like rubber) deposition (Fig. 3.8b). 
(a) Parenchyma
Thin walls
(b) Collenchyma
Thick walls
Fig. 3.8: Various types of 
simple permanent tissues
Thick lignified walls
(c) Sclerenchyma
Epidermal hair
Epidermis
Cuticle
Phloem
Ground tissue
Lateral meristem
Xylem
Sclerenchyma
Stem
Vascular 
tissue
T.S. of the stem
Parenchyma
Collenchyma
Fig. 3.7: Internal structure of a sunflower stem
Sunflower
(Helianthus annuus)
Ground tissue

Tissues in Action
33
This tissue provides support and flexibility, allowing 
parts of the plant like stems and tendrils to bend without 
breaking.
c.	Sclerenchyma
Sclerenchyma cells have thick walls (Fig. 3.8c) due to 
deposition of lignin, making them hard and strong (forms 
the woody structure). Most of these cells are dead. This 
tissue is found in stems, leaf veins, and hard coverings of 
seeds and nuts, such as coconut husk and walnut shell.
(iii) Conducting tissues — Complex permanent tissues
How does water reach the leaves of tall trees? How does 
food prepared in leaves reach other parts of the plant?
Plants have specialised conducting tissues called xylem 
and phloem, together known as complex permanent 
tissues, because they are made up of different types of 
cells working together. Xylem (Fig. 3.9a) is the tissue that 
transports water and minerals from the roots to other parts 
of the plant. It also provides strength to the plant. Xylem 
consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem 
fibres. Tracheids and vessels are tubular and thick-walled. 
Xylem parenchyma are the only living component of 
xylem while trachieds, vessels, and xylem fibres are 
primarily sclerenchymatous. Unlike the xylem, phloem is 
mostly made up of living cells (Fig. 3.9b). It consists of sieve 
tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem 
fibres. Some cells are long and tubular, joined end to end 
by perforated walls. These cells form sieve tubes. Sieve 
tubes transport food from leaves to other parts of the plant. 
The cellular functions of the sieve tube cells are regulated 
by companion cells. Companion cells are specialised 
parenchyma cells. Main function of companion cells is to 
monitor loading and unloading of sugars in sieve tubes. 
Phloem parenchyma store food materials, 
and resin, tannins and latex. The sieve tubes 
are also supported by phloem fibres which 
are 
primarily 
schlerenchymatous 
and 
provide strength. 
So 
far, 
we 
have 
studied 
different 
types of plant tissues based on their 
functions — protection, 
support 
and 
conduction. In a plant body, these tissues do 
not work alone. They are organised together 
into larger groups called tissue systems.
Plant tissues are organised into three 
tissue systems (Fig. 3.10) —
1.	 Dermal tissue system: This forms the 
outer covering of the plant. It protects 
the inner parts and reduces water loss.
Xylem
Xylem
Phloem
Phloem
Phloem
Epidermal 
tissue
Epidermal 
tissue
Ground tissue
Ground 
tissue
Epidermal 
tissue
Xylem
Fig. 3.10: Tissue systems in plants
Fig. 3.9: Vascular tissue: (a) xylem, and 
(b) phloem
Tracheid
Xylem fibre
Vessel
Xylem  
parenchyma
Sieve 
pore
Companion 
cell
Phloem 
parenchyma
Sieve tube
(b)
(a)
1.	 You may have noticed that 
fibres of coconut husk are hard 
and brittle, whereas the leaf 
stalks of coriander are soft and 
flexible. Find out the reason. 
Pause and Ponder

Exploration|Grade 9
34
2.	 Ground tissue system: This forms the main body of 
a plant between the dermal and conducting tissues. It 
includes parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma.
3.	 Vascular tissue system: This consists of conducting 
tissues — xylem and phloem.
Pause and Ponder
2.	 Why do you think that a thick cuticle on the outer wall of 
epidermis is advantageous for a plant living in the desert 
but disadvantageous for a plant living underwater?
3.	 Once water is absorbed by plant roots, it has to travel 
against gravity through xylem. How do the ‘dead’ cells of 
the xylem work together with the living cells of leaves at 
the top to keep the water moving?
4.	 What do you think will happen if there were no stomata 
in the epidermis of the stem or leaves?
3.3 Animal Tissues
Like plants, animal cells also group together and specialised 
in performing different functions. These groups of similar 
cells form animal tissues. Let us perform a few simple 
activities — 
	y Blink your eyes quickly.
	y Clench and open your fist.
	y Take a deep breath.
	y Touch something warm or cold.
Now think, which tissue helps you move? Which tissue 
enables you to sense heat or cold? Which tissue allows 
oxygen to enter the blood? Which tissue holds the body 
together so that the skin does not fall off?
Many such questions can be asked but the answers 
lie in the diversity of animal tissues, which are specially 
adapted to perform different functions. It is interesting to 
understand how the structure of an animal tissue suits its 
specific function.
Let us explore different kinds of animal tissues. Each 
tissue performs a specific function.
3.3.1 Epithelial tissues — Structure and 
functions 
Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body 
(skin) and also lines the internal organs, such as the 
mouth, lungs, blood vessels and intestine. It is composed 
of closely packed cells with very little space between them. 
This structure prevents the entry of the germs, reduces 
Meet the Scientists
Sipra Guha Mukherjee in 
collaboration with
S. C. Maheshwari made a 
breakthrough discovery in the 
area of plant tissue culture. 
Their research led to the 
development of a complete 
plant through anther culture, 
using an artificial nutrient 
medium under controlled 
laboratory conditions. 
This pioneering work 
greatly contributed to crop 
improvement and brought 
significant progress in modern 
agriculture. 
Ready to Go Beyond
In young plants, the 
outer protective layer is a 
single-layered epidermis. 
As plants grow older, some 
cells below the epidermis of 
the stem develop the ability 
to divide, act as lateral 
meristematic cells and form 
the cork cambium. The 
division of cork cambium 
cells gives rise to cork cells. 
Cork cells are dead, compactly 
arranged, and contain a 
substance which makes them 
impermeable to water and 
gases. This forms the bark of 
the tree.

Tissues in Action
35
water loss, and also helps in the absorption, secretion and movement of 
substances. Different types of epithelial tissues are structurally adapted 
to perform different functions (Table 3.2).
Study Table 3.2 along with the corresponding diagrams shown in Fig. 3.11 
to understand how structure and function of epithelial tissues are related.
Table 3.2: Characteristics of functionally and structurally different 
epithelial tissues
Function
Structure
Location in the body
Exchange: Helps in rapid 
diffusion of liquids and 
gases
Single layer of thin, flat cells (Fig. 
3.11a)
Lining of the tissue in 
the blood vessels and 
lungs
Protection: Protects 
underlying tissues from 
mechanical injury, friction 
and entry of microbes
Many layers of cells; the outer 
cells are flat and tightly packed 
(Fig. 3.11b)
Skin, mouth and 
oesophagus
Secretion: Production 
and secretion of mucus, 
enzymes, hormones, sweat 
saliva
Cells specialised for producing 
and releasing substances; may 
be cuboidal or columnar  
(Fig. 3.11c)
Salivary glands, sweat 
glands and stomach 
lining 
Sensory functions: Smell, 
taste, sound and balance 
Specialised receptor cells having 
hair like cilia (Fig. 3.11d)
Nostrils, taste buds 
and inner ear
Absorption: Efficient 
uptake of nutrients, water, 
etc.
Single layer of tall, pillar-
like cells, often with hair-like 
structure (Fig. 3.11e)
Lining of small 
intestine
3.3.2 How are various parts 
connected in our body?
You have read that blood connects 
different parts of the body by transporting 
nutrients, gases, hormones, etc. 
In the same way, bones connect 
and support the body from head 
to toe. A tissue that connects and supports 
other tissues is called a connective tissue. 
Both blood and bones are connective 
tissues. Though both are connective 
tissues, they differ in composition and 
consistency. Blood is fluid, while bone is 
hard. This difference is due to the matrix, 
which is watery, soft and jelly‑like in 
blood but hard, solid, and rigid in bones 
(Fig. 3.12a).
Fig. 3.11: Types of epithelial tissues in 
different parts of the body
(c)
(b)
(d)
(a)
(e)
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9

Exploration|Grade 9
36
Activity 3.2: Let us understand further
	y Recall everyday experiences given in the first column of Table 3.3.
	y Write your observations and questions in your notebook.
	y Compare your observations with the observations given in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Your experiences, observations and questions from daily life
Experiences
Observations
Questions
When you get a small 
cut on your skin
Red blood oozes out from the cut. 
A clot is formed after some time.
What causes 
blood to clot?
When you get a skin 
infection
The area turns red and perhaps 
slightly swollen. You may have a fever.
When you exercise 
or run
You breathe faster. Your face may 
turn red.
The everyday experiences mentioned above are related to blood and its 
components. 
1.	 The red colour of blood is due to haemoglobin, an iron-rich protein 
in the Red Blood Cells (RBCs). RBCs live for about 4 months and are 
replaced regularly.
2.	 Platelets help in blood clotting at the site of the injury.
3.	 During exercise or running, muscles need more oxygen, so breathing 
becomes faster and blood flow increases (face appears red).
4.	 White Blood Cells (WBCs) collect at infected areas, causing pus 
formation and inflammation (causing redness and swelling, and 
possible pus formation at the infected area).
Fig. 3.12: Types of connective tissues
(c) Arrangement of 
tissues at a joint
Tendon
Cartilage
Ligament
(b) Types of bones
Collar bone
Long bone
Kneecap
(a) Components of blood
WBC
RBCs
Platelets
Plasma 
(55% of total 
volume)
Formed 
elements 
(45% of total 
volume)

Tissues in Action
37
Functions 
of 
other 
connective 
tissues 
as 
experienced 
through 
different actions.
Activity 3.3: Let us perform
1.	 Perform the actions given in Table 3.4.
2.	 Record your experiences and compare them with the experiences 
given in Table 3.4.
3.	 Study their functions and identify the connective tissues (Fig. 3.12).
Table 3.4: Connective tissues
Action
Experience
Function
Identified 
connective tissue
Touch your 
elbow gently
A hard and rigid 
structure
Gives strength, 
support and 
protection
Bone
(Fig. 3.12b)
Press and fold 
your ear or 
gently press your 
nose and stop
A soft and flexible 
structure that 
retains shape 
again
Provides flexibility 
and cushions the 
ends of bones for 
shock absorption
Cartilage
(Fig. 3.12c)
Touch your 
forearm muscles 
and wiggle your 
fingers
Feel movement in 
the forearm even 
though fingers are 
far away
Connects muscle 
to bone, and thus, 
brings about 
movement
Tendon
(Fig. 3.12c)
Sit on a chair and 
move your leg 
upwards till your 
knee allows
The joint does not 
go beyond a limit
Connects bone to 
bone and provides 
stability, limits 
movement, and 
helps prevent 
dislocation
Ligament
(Fig. 3.12c)
Bones have a rigid matrix containing calcium and phosphorus 
compounds, giving them strength and rigidity. In contrast, cartilage has 
a soft, jelly-like matrix, and provides flexibility and cushioning. Other 
connective tissues include tendons and ligaments. Tendons connect 
muscles to bones, while ligaments connect bones to bones and prevent 
excessive movement (Fig. 3.12c).
3.3.3 Can we control movement in our body?
Some movements are under our conscious control, such as running, writing 
or lifting objects. These are called voluntary movements and are carried 
out by skeletal muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are attached to the skeleton. They 
are made up of bundles of long, cylindrical cells called muscle fibres, 
which are unbranched, multinucleate (having many nuclei) and striated 
(showing light and dark bands).
Are there involuntary movements in the body? Yes, many body 
movements occur automatically without conscious control, for example 
the movement of food in the intestine and the beating of the heart. These 
are called involuntary movements. The muscles responsible for these 

Exploration|Grade 9
38
movements include smooth muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are 
found in organs like the stomach and intestines. Their cells 
are spindle-shaped, have a single nucleus and lack striations. 
They help in slow, continuous movements like digestion.
The cardiac muscles (Fig. 3.13) are found only in the 
heart. Their fibres are cylindrical and branched with a 
single nucleus, and have faint striations. Cardiac muscles 
work tirelessly and rhythmically, enabling the heart to beat 
throughout life without fatigue.
3.3.4 How does the body sense, communicate and 
respond?
Have you noticed how quickly you pull your hand away 
from something hot, or how you remember the lyrics of 
a song learned long ago? These actions are controlled 
by nervous tissue, which forms the body’s control and 
coordination network. The brain acts as the control centre; 
coordinating activities, memory and responses across the 
body. Muscles, both voluntary and involuntary, cannot 
function independently. They receive instructions from 
the nervous tissue. For example, during exercise, the brain 
signals the heart to beat faster to meet the body’s increased 
oxygen demand.
The cells of nervous tissue are called neurons (Fig. 3.14) 
or nerve cells, which are specialised to receive, process and 
transmit messages. Each neuron has three main parts — the 
cell body, which contains the nucleus and controls cell 
activities; dendrites, which receive signals from other 
neurons; and an axon, a long fibre that carries messages 
from the cell and ends at axon terminals. The axon terminals 
transmit the messages to other cells.
3.4 The Musculoskeletal System
The musculoskeletal system (Fig. 3.15) is made up of 
bones, muscles, joints, cartilage, tendons and ligaments. 
This system helps us stand upright, move, maintain posture 
and protect delicate organs. The musculoskeletal system 
functions under the control of the nervous system. Muscles 
pull on bones to produce movement. They are attached to 
bones by strong, flexible bands called tendons (Fig. 3.15). 
When a muscle contracts, the tendon transmits this force 
to the bone, resulting in movement at a joint. Have you 
wondered how much of your body weight comes from 
bones? On an average, the adult human skeleton makes up 
about 12 – 15 per cent of body weight, though this can vary 
with age, gender and body composition.
Fig. 3.15: Musculoskeletal 
system in human body
Tendon
Ligament
Muscles
Cartilage
Bones
Joint
Fig. 3.13: Different types of muscles
Skeletal muscle
Cardiac muscle
Smooth muscle
Fig. 3.14: Structure of a neuron
Cell body
Dendrites
Axon 
terminals
Axon
Nucleus

Tissues in Action
39
Activity 3.4: Let us investigate
What percentage of total body weight comes from bones and muscles?
1.	 Step on a weighing scale and record your total body weight.
2.	 Use online references or health resources to find average bone and 
muscle mass percentage for your age, gender, and an Indian body type 
(these may vary by ethnicity). For example, on average, adult males 
have about 40 – 50 per cent muscle, and adult females have ~30 – 40 per 
cent muscle, although bone mass is about 12 – 15 per cent for all adults.
3.	 Multiply your total body weight by the bone percentage and muscle 
percentage to estimate the weight of your bones and muscles.
4.	 Record the estimated bone weight and muscle weight, and compare 
them with your total body weight.
5.	 Compare your findings with those of your classmates and calculate the 
class average. 
Discuss why do bone and muscle mass differ between individuals, and 
how do they contribute to the overall body weight?
3.4.1 The musculoskeletal system in action 
Activity 3.5: Let us observe
Move different parts of your body and observe what movement(s) it can 
make.
Table 3.5: Different types of movements our body can make
Body 
parts
Complete 
rotation
Partial 
rotation
Bending
Turning, side-raising,  
up-down or any other movement
Elbow
No
No
Yes
Shoulder
Knee
Neck
Fingers
Toes
Wrist
You may have noticed that some parts of our body can move easily in 
many directions, while others move only in a single direction. Why does 
this happen? The difference is due to the types of joints present. A joint is 
a junction between two or more bones. Joints allow movement but they 
cannot move the bones on their own. So, what actually causes the bones to 
move?

Exploration|Grade 9
40
3.5 Types of Joints
3.5.1 Ball and socket joint
The shoulder joint allows free movement of the arm 
(Table 3.5). This is because the rounded top of the upper 
arm bone fits into a shallow hollow of the shoulder bone, 
forming the ball and socket joint (Fig. 3.16). Together 
with the collarbone, the shoulder forms the shoulder 
girdle, which connects the arm to the skeleton. This 
joint allows forward, backwards, sideways and circular 
movements.
3.5.2 Hinge joint
Unlike the shoulder, the elbow bends and straightens 
in one direction only like a door hinge (Table 3.5). This 
type of joint is called a hinge joint. A similar hinge joint 
is present in the knee, where a small bone called the 
kneecap protects the joint.
3.5.3 Pivot joint
Now, try shaking your head ‘no.’ Place your hand at the 
back of your neck and feel the gentle movement. How 
does the neck move so freely? The skull is connected to 
the backbone through a pivot joint, which allows the 
head to move side to side like a doorknob turning in 
its socket.
3.5.4 Fixed joints
The skull is a hard case of flat bones joined together to 
protect the brain, eyes and ears. The bones of the skull 
are connected by fixed joints, which means the bones 
of the skull cannot move. This keeps the brain safe even 
when the body moves.
Fig. 3.16: Types of joints
Fixed joint
Hinge joints
Ball and socket 
joints
Pivot joint
Pause and Ponder
5.	 Look at the picture given below (Fig. 3.17). Carefully observe the various poses of classical 
and folk dances of India. Can you identify which joints are involved? Also, what type of 
movement each joint allows?
Fig. 3.17: Poses of classical and folk dances of India
Ready to Go Beyond
Stem cells in the bone marrow 
are special cells that can divide 
and make new cells. In a bone 
marrow transplant, stem cells 
from a healthy person are given to 
patients who have blood cancers 
like Leukemia or disorders, such 
as Thalassemia.

Tissues in Action
41
3.6 Skeletal System
The skeletal system consists of a framework of bones that provides strength 
and protects delicate internal organs. It includes the skull, vertebral column 
and rib cage. From the base of the skull, it extends a flexible column called 
the backbone or vertebral column (spine), made up of a series of small 
bones called vertebrae. It supports the body and helps us stand upright. 
Between each vertebra is a cartilage disc, which acts as a cushion and 
allows flexibility, so we can bend and twist without injuring the internal 
spinal cord.
Can you feel the bones under your chest? These are your ribs. You have 
12 pairs of ribs and together they form the rib cage. The rib cage acts like a 
protective cage to protect vital organs, such as the heart and lungs. But you 
may wonder, “How can such a strong cage move? And why does it need to 
move?”. The ribs are attached to the spine at the back and to the breast bone 
(sternum) in the front. They are joined by flexible cartilage. This flexibility 
allows the rib cage to expand and contract during breathing. This movement 
increases and decreases space in the chest, allowing air to move in and out 
of the lungs. Injury to the ribs can make breathing painful and difficult.
Bridging Science and Society
Yoga, described in ancient Indian texts includes physical postures, breathing 
and meditation. Research shows it improves flexibility, posture and breathing, 
reduces stress, and helps prevent lifestyle diseases. Every year, 21st June is 
observed as the International Yoga Day to promote role of Yoga in health and 
well-being.
Maintaining correct posture, proper nutrition, regular exercise and yoga 
keeps our bones strong, muscles fit, joints flexible, and protects the body 
from stiffness.
Fig. 3.18: Poses of Surya Namaskar
1
7
4
10
2
5
3
6
8
9
11
12

Exploration|Grade 9
42
Think as a Scientist
From one cell to an organism: Totipotency
In 1958, F. C. Steward demonstrated that even single cells from vascular 
phloem of carrot retain the ability to regenerate whole plants. He was the first 
person to do so!
He and his team conducted an experiment using the phloem cells of 
carrot. He grew these cells in a nutrient medium containing simple sugars and 
hormones under appropriate conditions. He observed that these phloem cells 
divided to form a mass of cells, which gradually divided and differentiated 
into a complete plant. 
It shows that cells of phloem first dedifferentiated (cells regain the ability to divide) to 
form an undifferentiated mass of unspecialised cells. These, when grown in appropriate 
conditions, supplemented 
with nutrients and growth 
chemicals, further divided 
and redifferentiated to 
form roots, shoot, and 
eventually the complete 
plant. Thus, some mature 
plant cells have the ability 
to undifferentiate, divide 
and 
redifferentiate 
to 
develop into a new plant 
under specific conditions. 
This 
is 
known 
as 
totipotency and such cells 
are totipotent cells. This is 
similar to the ability of a 
zygote 
to 
divide 
and 
differentiate 
into 
an 
entire organism.
Cross section 
of carrot root
Fragments 
were cultured 
in nutrient 
medium; 
stirring caused 
single cells to 
shear off into 
the liquid
Single cells 
free in 
suspension 
began to 
divide
Embryonic 
plant 
developed 
from a 
cultured 
single cell
Plantlet was 
cultured 
on agar 
medium, 
and later 
planted in 
soil
Adult 
plant
2-mg 
fragments
Fig. 3.19: Regeneration of a carrot plant
In his experiment on phloem cells of carrot, F. C. Steward used different combinations of 
nutrients and other factors, and obtained the following results.
Table 3.6: Effect of light, air and nutrient medium on growth of the cultured plant cells
Conditions
Composition of nutrient 
medium
Increase in fresh weight (mg) of 
the cells from intial weight
Light
Air


Solid medium + nutrients
reduced


Liquid medium + nutrients
20% increased


Liquid medium + nutrients
reduced
Based upon Table 3.6, think about these questions: 
(a)	 What do you conclude about the characteristics of phloem cells of carrot?
(b)	 In which of the three combinations would you obtain the highest and lowest biomass? 
What could be the possible reason(s) for this observation?
(c)	
Will you get the same results if you culture animal cells instead of carrot cells?
(d)	 Think and mention any two commercial applications of the study above.

Tissues in Action
43
Bridging Science and Society
In nature, plant pathologists have observed a disease in plants called crown 
gall disease (Fig. 3.20). In this disease, tumour-like swellings develop on the 
stems due to rapid and uncontrolled cell division. The disease is caused by 
a bacterium called Agrobacterium tumefaciens.
Instead of only trying to cure this disease, scientists studied how a 
bacterium transfers its genetic material into plant cells. This knowledge 
was later used in plant tissue culture and genetic engineering. Today, 
Agrobacterium is used as a tool to introduce useful genes into plants 
for the production of valuable phytochemicals, improved crops and 
disease-resistant varieties.
Fig. 3.20: Crown 
gall disease
	y Tissues are groups of similar cells that work together to perform 
specific functions.
	y Different tissues coordinate with one another to perform life 
processes in plants and animals.
	y Plant tissues are broadly classified into meristematic and 
permanent tissues, depending on their ability to divide.
	y Functionally, plant tissues can be categorised as protecting tissue, 
supporting tissue and conducting tissue. 
	y Permanent tissues may be simple (made-up of one type of cell) or 
complex (made-up of more than one type of cell).
	y Simple permanent tissues include parenchyma, collenchyma and 
schlerenchyma.
	y Complex permanent tissues include xylem and phloem that 
transport water and food respectively to all parts of the plant.
	y Animal tissues are mainly of four types; epithelial, connective, 
muscular and nervous tissues.
	y Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body or protective 
lining to internal organs to provide protection and other functions. 
	y Connective tissue connects and supports various organs and 
tissues of the body.
	y Muscular tissue produces voluntary and involuntary movements 
for locomotion, and other movements in the body.
	y Nervous tissue consists of neurons to receive and transmit 
impulses, and helps regulate body activities.
	y Skeletal system protects organs and provides support.
	y In our body, movement occurs by the coordination of muscles and 
bones (musculoskeletal system), under the control of the nervous 
system.
At a Glance

Exploration|Grade 9
44
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1.	 Meristematic tissues divide repeatedly. What property of their cells 
allows them to do this?
(i)	 They have thick walls for protection.
(ii)	 They contain large vacuoles that store nutrients.
(iii)	 They have thin walls, dense cytoplasm and large prominent 
nucleus.
(iv)	 They are functionally differentiated cells.
2.	 If a plant is unable to transport food from leaves to roots which tissue 
is malfunctioning?
(i)	 Xylem
(ii)	 Phloem
(iii)	 Epidermis
(iv)	 Sclerenchyma
3.	 Why are the epithelial tissues that line an animal’s internal organs 
usually only one or a few cells thick?
(i)	 To store food efficiently.
(ii)	 To provide maximum strength.
(iii)	 To allow quick exchange of materials across them.
(iv)	 To reduce friction.
4.	 You can perform these two jumps (Fig. 3.21):  
Straight-leg jump — keep knees and ankles stiff.  
Normal jump — bend knees and ankles naturally.  
How did your ankle, knee and hip positions differ between the two 
jumps?
5.	 Which type of joint is involved when you bend your knees and ankles?
(i)	 Ball and socket
(ii)	 Hinge
(iii)	 Pivot
6.	 In each of the following cases (A, B, C and D), choose the correct option 
as given below:
(i)	 Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(ii)	 Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation 
of (A).
(iii)	 (A) is true, but (R) is false.
(iv)	 (A) is false, but (R) is true.
A.	 Assertion: Epithelium is well-suited for gas exchange in the lungs.
	
Reason: It consists of multiple layers of tall cells that slow down 
diffusion. 
B.	 Assertion: Cardiac muscle can contract continuously without 
fatigue.
	
Reason: Cardiac muscle cells have a high number of mitochondria 
and an abundant blood supply.
Fig. 3.21

Tissues in Action
45
C.	 Assertion: Tendons connect bone to bone and allow joint movement.
	
Reason: Tendons are made of tough connective tissue that transmits 
force from muscle to bone.
D.	 Assertion: In a hinge joint, movement occurs primarily in one 
plane.
	
Reason: The bone ends are shaped to allow sliding in all directions.
7.	 Plot a graph between the age of a tree (in years) on the x-axis and the 
diameter of the tree (in cm) along with the number of annual rings 
formed over time on the y-axis, using the data given in the Table 3.7.
	
Table 3.7: Data related to the age of a teak tree, and corresponding 
increase in the diameter of stem and number of annual rings
S. No.
Age of the teak 
tree (Years)
DBH (Diameter at 
Breast Height) of 
tree (cm)
Number of annual 
rings formed
1.
5
4
5
2.
10
8
10
3.
20
24
20
4.
25
28
25
5.
30
32
30
6.
40
40
40
(i)	 Analyse the graph in terms of the diameter of the stem over time 
and share the interpretation.
(ii)	 What is the relation between the diameter of the teak tree to the 
annual rings formed?
(iii)	 Which specialised tissue is responsible for the girth of the stem 
and where is it located?
8.	 In a forest, it was observed that one of the trees 
was severely debarked by an elephant to meet 
its food requirements, as the bark is a rich 
source of nutrients (Fig. 3.22). Based on your 
learning, answer the following: 
(i)	 Which function(s) of the tree is/are 
hampered by debarking? 
(ii)	 Which plant tissue would be affected by 
further damage to the tree trunk even 
after debarking? 
(iii)	 Which function of the tree would be hampered if the tissues 
beneath the bark were severely damaged?
(iv)	 What assumptions are you making to answer the questions 
above? How would the answer change if your assumptions are 
also changed?
Fig. 3.22

Exploration|Grade 9
46
9.	 Aamrapali observed that a young mango sapling’s stem bends flexibly 
during monsoon winds and does not break. Which tissue is responsible 
for this flexibility? Predict and provide your explanation of the impact 
if the existing tissue was replaced by sclerenchyma.
10.	 Sohan designed an experiment for the 
regeneration of sugarcane, where he 
used cuttings to grow sugarcane. He used 
two types of cuttings, type ‘A’ and type 
‘B’ (Fig. 3.23). After a few weeks, type ‘B’ 
cuttings sprouted and developed into 
sugarcane plants, whereas the type ‘A’ 
cuttings did not sprout. 
(i)	 Why were the type ‘B’ cuttings able to 
grow as sugarcane but type ‘A’ could 
not? 
(ii)	 What difference was present in type ‘B’ 
compared to type ‘A’?
(iii)	 What observation or measurement 
was made to determine whether this 
change had an effect?
(iv)	 What parameters should be kept the same for both types of cuttings 
to ensure a fair comparison?
11.	 During the discussion in class, Rohan gives a statement that, “A tissue 
is a group of similar cells performing similar functions”. But Rajiv 
counter argues that, “this is true in case of simple tissues but little 
different in case of complex tissues”. Provide your explanation in view 
of the discussion in class.
12.	 Coconut husk fibres are used for mats which are tough and fibrous. 
Which tissue has structural features suitable for providing this 
strength? Explain why living parenchyma couldn’t serve the same 
purpose.
13.	 Vibha claims to her friend Neha that, “Meristematic cells are located 
only at the root and shoot apices”. What do you think about this 
statement? What question can Neha ask Vibha to help her understand 
further if the statement is incorrect?
14.	 A plant cell and an animal cell are of the same size.
(i)	 Which cell will have a larger vacuole? Give reasons.
(ii)	 What assumptions are you making to answer the question above?
15.	 A textbook states, “Each plant tissue performs only one specific 
function”. What questions would you ask to critically examine the 
correctness of this statement? What examples of tissues would you 
take to find out the answers to these questions?
(A)
(B)
Fig. 3.23

Tissues in Action
47
The Journey Beyond
	y Visit a doctor and find out what happens in ligament rupture, cartilage 
rupture and fracture of bones. How can we reduce the risk by changing 
our lifestyle and nutritional balance? 
	y Perform the following activity.
(i)	 Sit with your feet flat on the floor. 
(ii)	 Place your fingers on the back of your ankle 
just above the heel (Fig. 3.24). 
(iii)	 Point your toes down and up, and you will feel 
the tendon moving.
	
Tendons are designed to withstand huge pulling 
forces. Try exploring other tendons in your body 
around the different joints.
	y Reflect on any of the physical practices you are 
familiar with, such as yoga, kabaddi, etc. How would it support bone 
and muscle health?
	y Reflect on any gardening methods you know, such as pruning, grafting, 
irrigation or crop rotation. How does each practice support the healthy 
functioning of plant tissues like meristems, conducting tissues or 
supporting tissues?
	y Turn a nature walk into a research project. 
(i)	 Observe different leaves and study their adaptations for various 
environments, such as desert, very moist or aquatic habitats.
(ii)	 Consult an elder community resource persons about their 
knowledge on different plant leaves, such as leaves that remain 
fresh for a long time, repel water or deter insects. Find out their 
traditional uses, such as making plates, preparing cooling wraps 
or functioning as insect repellents.
	y Study various dance forms of different tribal communities across the 
country. Each student learn and experience at least five steps. Observe 
the joint movements involved in performing these steps and then 
develop a dance or drama on the concept of joint movements. Perform 
this at the school’s annual function so that students from different 
grades can learn from it.
Fig. 3.25
Fig. 3.24
Will it be possible to obtain a complete animal from an animal cell like plants? 
If yes, what would be the advantages and challenges of this development?
The Quest Continues…
