It is widely accepted amongst the scientific community that life 
originated in water. Some researchers believe that life may have 
originated in small water pools with changing environmental 
conditions rather than in the oceans. Hot springs are examples 
of such environments. In India, the hot springs of Puga Valley in 
Ladakh maintain very high temperatures (nearly at the boiling 
point of water) even in a cold climate. These environmental 
conditions seem to be similar to those on the early Earth, about 
3.5 billion years ago. The organisms living in these hot springs 
are mostly heat-loving bacteria called thermophiles, which are 
unicellular. 
Scientists from the Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences, 
Lucknow, studied these hot springs and found that calcium carbonate 
formed rapidly around them. These deposits may have protected 
early organic molecules from harmful radiation and extreme 
conditions, and they may have also helped in the formation of the 
first protective membrane — the barrier that defines a cell.
All living organisms are made up of cells. The cell represents the 
basic level at which life exists. Some organisms, such as bacteria or 
yeast consist of only one cell (unicellular), while others like plants, 
fish, birds or humans are made up of millions of cells (multicellular) 
that work together. A group of similar cells performing similar 
Cell: The Building 
Block of Life
Chapter 
2
	y
Where does a cell 
come from? 
	y
How have 
technological 
interventions 
facilitated the 
creation of new 
knowledge in 
understanding the 
world beyond the 
naked eye?
	y
How is the cell 
structural and 
functional unit of 
life?
	y
How does a cell 
multiply?
Think It Over

Cell: The Building Block of Life
9
functions forms tissues. Different tissues 
are organised to form an organ and several 
organs work together to form organ systems. 
Such as, nasal pores, nasal cavity, trachea 
and lungs form respiratory system.
Even when cells are organised into 
tissues, organs, and organ systems the cell 
remains the fundamental unit of structure 
and function in all living organisms. This 
makes us wonder how such tiny cells 
perform so many different activities. What 
are the different components of a cell? How 
do cells in our body communicate with each 
other? Do cells live forever, or do they die? In 
this chapter, we will explore the answers to 
these questions as we enter the fascinating 
world of cells!
2.1 How to Study Cells? 
What do we call the ability of the human 
eye to see two very close objects as separate 
and distinct? Imagine two tiny dots drawn 
on a piece of paper. As the dots are moved 
closer, there comes a point at which they 
can no longer be seen as separate. When 
viewed from about 25 cm (the near point of 
human eye), two points separated by about 
0.1 mm can be seen as distinct; otherwise, 
they appear as a single point. This is called 
the limit of resolution of the human eye, 
which is 0.1 mm.
A cell is usually too small to be seen 
by the unaided eye (Fig. 2.1). This raises 
an important question — how have cell 
biologists studied the structure and function 
of cells that are much smaller than the limit 
of resolution of the human eye?
You 
have 
learnt 
about 
convex lens. A convex lens or a 
combination of lenses, i.e., an 
objective lens and an eyepiece are used for 
the magnification of an object (Fig. 2.1) to 
make it appear larger.
Robert Hooke was the first 
person to observe a cell in 1665 
using a self-designed microscope 
(capable of about 200–300X magnification). While examining a thin slice 
of cork, he observed small box-like compartments and named them ‘cells’. 
In school laboratories, light microscopes are used to observe objects using 
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 10
1 km
100 m
Human height 
Rocket
Chicken egg
Fish egg
Most plant and
animal cells 
Nucleus
Most bacteria
Mitochondrion
Smallest bacteria
Ribosomes
Viruses
Proteins
Lipids
Small molecules
Atoms
10 m
1 m 
0.1 m
1 cm
1 mm
100 µm
10 µm
1 µm
10 nm
100 nm
1 nm
0.1 nm
Unaided eye
Light microscope
Electron microscope
C
Amoeba
Neem Tree
Great Indian Bustard
Fig. 2.1: Size of the objects and its visibility through 
unaided to aided eye
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 2

10
Exploration|Grade 9
different objective lenses (e.g., 10X, 40X) to achieve 
better magnification and resolution under visible 
light. Explore different parts of a microscope 
(Fig. 2.2) in your school laboratory and 
use it to observe fine structures of various 
materials. Under the microscope, you 
will see a magnified image of an object. Can you 
estimate its actual size?
Activity 2.1: Let us estimate the size of a cell 
1.	 Take a transparent ruler with millimetre (mm) 
markings.
2.	 Place the ruler on the stage of microscope, focus 
on it using the adjustment knob and observe the 
diameter of the circular field of view through 
the eyepiece and measure it in mm. 
3.	 Convert the diameter from mm to micrometre 
(µm). Suppose the diameter of the visible field 
is 5 mm, meaning 5 × 1000 = 5000 µm.
4.	 Remove the ruler and place an onion peel slide 
on the stage of the microscope.
5.	 Focus on the slide and count the number of cells 
present along the diameter of the field of view in 
one straight line.
6.	 Estimate the real size of the cell using the 
formula:
Unit conversion:
1 millimetre (mm) = 1000 micrometre (µm)
Estimated size of the onion peel cell = 
Diameter of the visible field in micrometre
Number of cells along the diameter
Fig. 2.2: Structure of a light microscope
Eye piece
Body tube
Objective 
lens
Stage
Mirror
Course adjustment 
knob
Fine adjustment 
knob
Handle
Base
Suppose, 25 cells are seen along the diameter. In that case, the size of one 
onion cell would be 5000 µm/25 = 200 µm.
If the estimated size of an onion peel cell is 200 µm, how much does a 
light microscope magnify this cell? The total magnification of a microscope 
depends on its magnifying power of the eyepiece and the objective lens. If 
both the eyepiece and the objective lens have the magnifying power of 10X, 
then the total magnification will be 100X. This means that a cell with an 
estimated size of 200 µm will appear 100 times larger.
Thus, a microscope allows us to see very small structures clearly and is an 
essential tool for studying the cell structure. Over the years, scientists have 
improved the microscope by improving its three main features — resolution 
(measure of clarity), contrast (the difference in brightness between various 
Ready to Go Beyond 
Fig. 2.3: An electron microscope
Apart 
from 
light 
microscopes, 
scientists also use powerful electron 
microscopes that reveal the fine details 
of a cell structure. These instruments 
use a beam of electrons instead of light 
to produce highly magnified images, 
allowing us to see cell structure at 
the nanometre scale with remarkable 
clarity (a nanometre is one-billionth of 
a metre).
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 9

Cell: The Building Block of Life
11
parts of an object), and magnification. These improvements 
have turned microscope into a powerful tool for studying 
cells.
You can see a picture of the lower surface of Colocasia leaf 
observed under a Scanning Electron Microscope (Fig. 2.4).
2.2 Structure of a Cell
You have learnt that cells are organised into specialised 
tissues and organs, and collectively perform specific 
function. For these cells to function as units, they must 
be able to interact with one another and with their surroundings. These 
interactions occur at the cell boundary, where substances move between 
the cells and their external environment. Even single-celled organisms 
exchange materials and respond to their environment through cell 
membrane. 
2.2.1 Cell membrane — The universal feature of a cell
The cell membrane is a thin boundary that surrounds a cell and protects 
its contents. It defines the individuality of a cell and is also called the plasma 
membrane. The cell membrane is selectively permeable, which means it 
allows some substances to pass through it while blocking others. You have 
learnt how oxygen and carbon dioxide move across the membranes of 
alveoli in the lungs. How does the structure of the cell membrane in the 
cells of alveoli control the movement of substances across it?
Activity 2.2: Let us experiment
1.	 With the help of a kitchen knife, 
carefully cut a potato into two pieces 
of roughly equal size (Fig. 2.5). 
2.	 Measure and record the initial weight 
of both the pieces using a weighing 
balance. 
3.	 Put one piece of the potato in Beaker 
A with plain water.
4.	 Put the other piece of the potato in 
Beaker B with 20 per cent salt or sugar 
solution.
5.	 Leave them undisturbed for about 
an hour or until you notice a visible 
change in the size of the pieces.
6.	 Measure and record the final weight 
of each piece.
7.	 Calculate the difference between the 
initial and their final weights.
What do you observe? You may observe 
that —
Beaker A — The potato piece swells.
Beaker B — The potato piece shrinks.
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Fig. 2.5: Experimental set-up, and initial 
and final states of potato pieces in (a) plain 
water, and (b) 20 per cent salt solution
Initial
(b)
(a)
Beaker B
Beaker A
Experimental set-up
Final
(b)
(a)
Fig. 2.4: Electron micrograph of lower 
surface of a Colocasia leaf showing stomata
Stomata

12
Exploration|Grade 9
What do you infer? What do you expect in terms of changes in their 
weight? The weight of the potato piece in Beaker A has increased, while 
the weight of the potato piece in Beaker B has decreased. This happens 
because the cell membrane allows water to move in and out of the cell 
but not the sugar or salt molecules. Water moves from an area with more 
water and less solute (dilute solution) to an area with less water and more 
solute (concentrated solution) until the concentrations in the two areas 
become equal. This movement of water through a selectively permeable 
membrane is called osmosis. You have learnt in Activities 7.8 
(dye spreading in water) and 7.9 (fragrance spreading in air) in 
Grade 8 that particles of matter intermix, due to a difference in 
their concentrations, also called a concentration gradient. Diffusion is the 
net movement of particles from a higher to a lower concentration (which 
occurs even without a membrane). Osmosis is the diffusion of water across 
a selectively permeable membrane. In plants, water from the soil enters 
root cells by this process of osmosis.
a cell is kept in salt or sugar solutions of different concentrations?
Solute concentration of extracellular 
medium = Solute concentration of intracellular 
medium — Isotonic solution
Isotonic
Solute concentration of extracellular 
medium < Solute concentration of intracellular 
medium — Hypotonic solution
Hypotonic
Solute concentration of extracellular 
medium > Solute concentration of intracellular 
medium — Hypertonic solution
Hypertonic
Fig. 2.6: Effect of solutions of different concentrations on a cell
solution
solution
solution
What if ...
Structurally, the cell membrane is 
extremely thin, about 7 to 10 nanometres 
(nm) thick (1 nanometre = 0.000001 mm). It 
is made up of lipids (fats) and proteins. The 
fluid-mosaic model explains its structure 
(Fig. 2.7) : 
	y The membrane has a lipid bilayer (two 
layers of special fat molecules with 
water attracting heads outwards and 
water repelling tails inwards) with 
proteins embedded in them.
	y The molecules can move sideways, flip and rotate within the membrane. 
Hence, it is fluid.
	y Proteins in the membrane act like gatekeepers in helping substances 
pass through.
Fig. 2.7: Structure of a cell membrane
Lipid 
bilayer
Various types of 
proteins
mung bean 
seeds are 
kept in a 
concentrated 
solution after 
soaking in 
water for 12 
hours? What 
will happen 
to them?
What if ...
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 7

Cell: The Building Block of Life
13
	y Since the molecules are arranged like tiles in a mosaic, it is called the 
‘mosaic’ model.
All living cells communicate with their surroundings and their 
neighbouring cells through the cell membrane. However, cells of plant, 
fungi, and bacteria have an additional layer around the cell membrane, 
called the cell wall. What do you think is the necessity of the cell wall in 
these cells?
Activity 2.3: Let us investigate
1.	 Prepare temporary slides of a thin peel of an onion leaf or a Rhoeo 
(Cradle lily) leaf and mount it with safranin using cover slip to observe 
plant cells under a microscope. 
2.	 Similarly, prepare a temporary slide of cheek cells by gently scraping 
the inner side of your cheek with a cotton swab or the blunt end of a 
toothpick. 
3.	 Spread the cheek cells on a clean glass slide. 
4.	 Add a drop of water followed by a few drops of methylene blue stain and 
carefully place a coverslip. 
5.	 Observe both the slides under a microscope.
What do you observe? Onion peel cells (Fig. 2.8a) or Rhoeo leaf peel cells are 
box-shaped and regularly arranged, whereas cheek cells are irregularly 
arranged (Fig. 2.8b). Why do you think this difference exists?
Prepare two slides of a Rhoeo leaf peel and human cheek cells again, and 
put 20 per cent sugar solution on them. Observe them under a microscope 
after half an hour. What do you observe? You must have observed that 
the boundaries of the plant cells remain the same but their inner content 
shrinks, and the space between the inner and outer boundaries increases 
(Fig. 2.9a and b). You may observe that the cheek cells, on the other hand, 
have shrunk considerably.
2.2.2 Cell wall — The outer covering of cells
In general, plants cannot move from place to place, so they need a rigid 
structure to withstand environmental stresses like wind and rain. 
Therefore, plant cells have an additional covering outside the cell membrane 
called a cell wall. The cell wall also helps leaves and flowers remain firm, 
and maintain their shapes and help plants stay upright. Although rigid the 
cell wall is permeable, which means water and some dissolved minerals 
can pass through it. Along with the selective permeability of the cell 
membrane, the permeability of the cell wall helps plant roots absorb water 
and nutrients from the soil. 
When we place a Rhoeo leaf or an onion peel in a concentrated sugar 
solution the plant cells lose water due to osmosis. However, the cells do not 
shrink in size because their rigid cell wall maintains their shape. The inner 
content of a cell shrinks as the cell membrane pulls away from the cell wall. 
This shows that the cell wall helps plant cells remain firm in their original 
shape.
Animal cells, such as cheek cells do not have a cell wall. Therefore, 
when placed in a concentrated sugar solution, they lose water and shrink. 
Fig. 2.8: (a) The 
onion peel cells, and 
(b) human cheek cells
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.9: Cradle lily leaf 
peel cells (a) in water, and 
(b) in 20 per cent sugar 
solution
(a) 
(b) 

14
Exploration|Grade 9
Without a rigid cell wall, animal cells can change shape easily. This cellular 
flexibility supports the overall movement and functioning of animal tissues. 
The plant cell wall is primarily made of cellulose, a type of carbohydrate 
formed by many glucose units linked together. Cellulose in our diet acts 
as roughage, helping in digestion. Some microorganisms, like fungi and 
bacteria also have a cell wall to provide protection and structural support 
to their cells.
1.	 What argument would you give for the necessity of a cell wall in plants 
usually fixed in one place versus in animals usually moving from one 
place to the other?
2.	 What consequences would you predict for a plant cell if its cell wall were 
to become as flexible as a cell membrane?
3.	 Why is it important to cut the two potato pieces in roughly equal size and 
measure their initial weight before placing them in different liquids? 
Pause and Ponder
2.3 The Cell Interior — A Coordinated Working System 
You have learnt that most cells have three basic parts:
	y a selectively permeable membrane called the plasma 
membrane,
	y a semi-fluid, jelly-like substance called the cytoplasm, and
	y a prominent nucleus.
In addition to the nucleus, the cytoplasm contains several sub-cellular 
components called organelles, along with other substances present in it, 
most of which are only visible with an electron microscope.
Activity 2.4: Let us study
Cell wall
Mitochondria
Golgi body
Endoplasmic 
reticulum
Ribosome
Ribosome
Ribosome
Cytoplasm
Cytoplasm
Nucleolus
Chloroplast
Cell membrane
Vacuole
Vacuole
Nucleoid
Appendage for 
locomotion
(a)
(b)
(c)
Nucleus
Fig. 2.10: (a) A typical bacterial cell, (b) a typical plant cell, and (c) a typical animal cell
Lysosome
1.	 Study the given diagrams of a bacterial cell, a plant cell, and an animal 
cell (Fig. 2.10a, b and c). 
2.	 Observe the different structures present in each of them. 
3.	 Record your observations in Table 2.1. 
A bacterial cell lacks a well-defined nucleus and membrane-bound 
organelles (organelles surrounded by their own membranes). Such cells 
are called prokaryotic cells (pro means primitive and karyon means 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
(Genetic material)

Cell: The Building Block of Life
15
nucleus). In prokaryotic cells, most cellular activities take place directly 
in the cytoplasm. In contrast, plant and animal cells have a well-defined 
nucleus and several membrane-bound organelles. Such cells are called 
eukaryotic cells (eu means true, and karyon means nucleus). More 
details of the characterstics of prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells is given 
in Table 2.2.
Table 2.1: Comparison of different kinds of cells based on their structure
S. No.
Cell structures
Bacterial 
cell
Plant  
cell
Animal 
cell
1.
Cell membrane
2.
Cell wall 
3.
Cytoplasm 
4.
Well-defined nucleus (genetic 
material enclosed by a membrane)
5.
Primitive nucleus or nucleoid (genetic 
material without membrane around it)
6.
Membrane-bound organelles
 
Table 2.2: Comparison between prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells
Characteristics
Prokaryotic cell
Eukaryotic cell
Primitive nucleus
Present
Absent
Diameter of a typical cell
1 to 10 µm
10 to 100 µm
Number of cells in an organism
Usually unicellular
Can be unicellular 
or multicellular
Membrane-bound organelles
Absent
Present
Membrane-bound nucleus
Absent
Present
Which of the cells given in Fig. 2.10 fall under the categories of prokayotic 
and eukaryotic cells?
In eukaryotic cells, a network of fine fibres forms the cytoskeleton, which 
provides structural support, maintains cell shape, and enables cell movement 
and internal transport. It is visible only under an electron microscope as 
a separate entity. The cytoplasm may also store starch (in plant cells), or 
crystals of calcium oxalate or silica (in some plant cells). These are known 
as cell inclusions.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Ready to Go 
Beyond 
Viruses, viroids, 
and prions are 
acellular (no 
cells) infectious 
agents that 
are too small 
to be seen 
under a light 
microscope. 
Viruses are 
composed of 
some genetic 
material with 
a protein coat. 
Viroids lack 
protein coat 
around its 
genetic material, 
while prions 
are misfolded 
proteins which 
lack genetic 
material.  

16
Exploration|Grade 9
2.3.1 Why do eukaryotic cells need these organelles? 
Eukaryotic cells carry out various life processes in different cell organelles 
independently at the same time.
Cell organelles help in building new materials, removing waste, and 
providing energy to the cell. They work together to perform all functions of 
a cell. In other words, a cell is like a tiny living factory, with each of its part 
doing a specific job. 
Let us explore these specialised structures present inside a cell.
Nucleus — House of coded 
instructions
The nucleus has a double-layered 
covering called the nuclear membrane, 
which has pores that allow the transfer 
of material between the nucleus and 
the cytoplasm. The nucleolus is the 
dense round body in the nucleus, where 
synthesis of ribosomal subunits take 
place. These subunits then exit the 
nucleus to cytoplasm where one large 
and one small subunits assemble to 
form ribosome (Fig. 2.11).
The nucleus contains chromosomes, which are visible as rod-shaped 
structures only when the cell is about to divide. Chromosomes contain 
information for inheritance of characters from parents to the next 
generation in the form of DNA (Deoxyribonucleic acid) molecules. 
Chromosomes are composed of DNA and specific proteins. DNA molecules 
contain the genetic information. The functional segments of DNA are called 
genes. In a non-dividing cell, this DNA is present as part of chromatin 
material. Chromatin material is visible as an entangled mass of thread-like 
structures. Whenever the cell is about to divide, the chromatin material 
gets organised into chromosomes (Fig. 2.12).
Threads of Curiosity
Some cells are specialised to perform specific functions. For example, mature Red 
Blood Cells (RBCs) in humans do not have a nucleus (enucleate). The absence of 
a nucleus provides more space for haemoglobin, allowing it to transport a larger 
amount of oxygen to all cells of the body. Since they lack a nucleus, they cannot 
repair or divide themselves. As a result, their lifespan is short and they survive 
approximately for 120 days. Do you know any other cells without nucleus?
Prokaryotic cells do not have a well-defined nucleus. Their DNA is 
present as a single circular molecule associated with specific proteins. The 
region containing this genetic material is called the nucleoid.
Fig. 2.12: From cell 
to DNA
Nucleus
Chromatin
Chromosome
DNA
Fig. 2.11: Structure of a nucleus
Nuclear pore
Double-layered 
nuclear membrane
Chromatin
Nucleolus
Nucleus

Cell: The Building Block of Life
17
Ribosomes — The protein factories 
These 
are 
tiny 
structures 
may 
be 
present 
either freely in the cytoplasm or attached to the 
endoplasmic reticulum. Ribosomes are the sites of 
protein synthesis. 
Endoplasmic Reticulum 
(ER) — Manufacturing factory
The Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER) is a large organelle 
that spreads like a network within the cytoplasm of the 
cell. The ER is continuous with the outer membrane 
of nuclear envelop. The ER plays a key role in the 
synthesis and transport of proteins, fats (lipids), and 
some hormones in some of the specialised cell. The 
structure of the ER in a cell varies depending on its 
function. There are two types of ER:
	y Rough Endoplasmic Reticulum (RER): It looks 
rough under an electron microscope because 
it has ribosomes attached to its surface, and is 
mainly involved in protein synthesis and protein 
secretion (for example, in gland cells, such as 
pancreatic cells). 
	y Smooth Endoplasmic Reticulum (SER): It does 
not have ribosomes on its surface, and therefore, 
looks smooth. It is involved in the synthesis, and 
storage of fats and hormones (Fig. 2.13).
Golgi apparatus — The packaging and 
shipping centres
If you carefully look at the diagram of a cell 
(Fig. 2.10b and c), you will notice stacks of flattened, 
sac-like structures. Together, these stacks form the 
Golgi apparatus (Fig. 2.13). It is functionally linked 
to the ER, the cell membrane and the other cell 
organelles. The Golgi apparatus acts like the cell’s 
post office. It modifies, sorts, and packages proteins 
and/or lipids into vesicles for transport, secretion, 
or lysosome formation.  
Lysosomes — The clean-up system
Cells produce waste materials and damaged, 
worn-out 
organelles 
during 
their 
activities. 
How does the cell prevent these wastes from 
accumulating inside it? 
Lysosomes are single membrane-bound sacs 
filled with enzymes, which can break down 
unwanted proteins, carbohydrates, fats, and even 
Meet a Scientist
The Golgi 
apparatus was 
first observed in 
1898 by an Italian 
scientist, Camillo 
Golgi, in the nerve 
cells of a barn 
owl. Using special 
staining techniques, he observed 
a thread-like network. Early 
microscopes could not resolve it 
clearly, therefore, many doubted 
its existence. However, electron 
microscope observations 
confirmed it decades later.
When the structure was 
clearly seen and confirmed, it 
was named the ‘Golgi apparatus’ 
in his honour.
Fig. 2.13: Endoplasmic reticulum and 
Golgi apparatus — pathway for protein 
processing and secretion
Ribosome
Rough 
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Smooth 
endoplasmic 
reticulum
Golgi 
apparatus
Vesicles
Plasma 
membrane

18
Exploration|Grade 9
damaged parts of the cell, keeping it clean and healthy. The products 
formed by the breakdown are released into the cytoplasm, where they may 
be reused in other cellular processes.
Threads of Curiosity
Human sperm cells contain lysosomal enzymes. When a sperm meets an egg, these 
enzymes help break down the outer layer of the egg, allowing fertilisation to take 
place. You will learn about the human sperm cells later in Chapter 11.
Mitochondria — The powerhouse of the 
cell
Mitochondria are often called the ‘powerhouses of 
the cell’ because they supply the energy needed for 
most cellular activities. Each mitochondrion (Fig. 
2.14) is surrounded by two membranes :
	y The outer membrane is smooth and 
porous.
	y The inner membrane is folded into finger-like 
projections called cristae, which increase 
the surface area for chemical reactions and 
facilitate energy production. 
In mitochondria, the glucose and other 
molecules are broken down to release energy 
during a process called cellular respiration. You have already studied about 
it. The energy released is stored in the form of a molecule called Adenosine 
Triphosphate (ATP), which acts as the energy currency and is used for most 
of the cellular activities. 
Plastids — Centre for food synthesis in the plant cells 
and beyond
You have learnt that mitochondria provide energy to the cell that comes 
from food. Animals can obtain food from their surroundings, however, 
plants synthesise food in the presence of sunlight. But where do plants 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
synthesise their food and obtain energy for cellular 
activities? Plants use special organelles called 
plastids for food synthesis and storage.
As you have learnt, plants prepare their 
food by the process of photosynthesis in the 
presence of sunlight. A green pigment called 
chlorophyll, which is present in the chloroplast 
(a type of plastid) absorbs sunlight. Chloroplasts 
are 
double-membrane-bound 
organelles, 
like 
mitochondria. Inside the chloroplast (Fig. 2.15) there 
is a semi-fluid substance called the stroma. Within 
the stroma are disc-shaped membrane structures 
that contain chlorophyll. Light energy is absorbed 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 9
Fig. 2.14: Structure of a mitochondrion
Outer 
membrane
Inner 
membrane
Intermembrane 
space
Ribosomes
DNA
Cristae
Fig. 2.15: Structure of a chloroplast 
Stroma
Ribosomes
Inner 
membrane
DNA
Outer 
membrane

Cell: The Building Block of Life
19
by them during photosynthesis. The sugars synthesised in this process are 
stored in stroma, along with the starch granules.
Mitochondria and plastids have some features that are similar to certain 
bacteria. For example, they both have their own DNA and ribosomes, and 
thus, they can make some of their own proteins. These characteristics 
suggest that both mitochondria and plastids share an evolutionary history 
with these single-celled organisms.
Are there any other plastids in plant cells that contain any pigments 
other than the green pigments? 
How do flowers, fruits, and vegetables acquire varied colours? 
In flower petals and fruits, plastids contain pigments other than chlorophyll. 
These plastids are called chromoplasts (in Greek, chroma means colour). 
Their pigments (may be yellow, orange or red) are the source of bright colours 
in such flowers and fruits. Such bright colours help in attracting pollinators 
for pollination and fruit-eating animals that help in seed dispersal. 
Some plastids lack pigments and are thus, colourless. These are called 
leucoplasts (in Greek, leukos means white). Leucoplasts store food material, 
such as starch, oils or proteins and are classified based on the type of food 
they store. For example, some leucoplasts in potato and taro (Colocasia) 
cells store starch. 
Vacuoles — The organelles for storage and support
Plastids, such as chloroplasts help plants produce food and temporarily 
store it. Other plastids, such as leucoplasts help in storing food. But where 
are water, minerals, and waste materials stored in the cell? Why do plants 
look wilted when they do not get enough water? 
In a mature plant cell, there is usually one large central vacuole 
surrounded by a single selectively permeable membrane. The vacuole is 
filled with a watery fluid called cell sap. The vacuole stores water, minerals, 
sugars and waste material. By storing large amounts of water, the vacuole 
helps maintain pressure inside the cell, which keeps a plant cell firm. When 
a plant does not get enough water, the vacuole loses water, the cells become 
less firm, and the plant gets wilted.
In animal cells, vacuoles are sometimes present. Although they are not 
as large as plant vacuoles, they help in the temporary storage of materials.
4.	 Do white flowers contain any pigment? Give reasons.
5.	 Draw a well-labelled schematic diagram of a plant or an animal cell using 
these clues —
	
(i)	Nucleus appears as a dark and round body inside the cell.
	
(ii)	ER spreads like a network of extended nuclear envelope.
	 (iii)	Mitochondria and chloroplasts are rod shaped.
You may refer to Fig. 2.10.
Pause and Ponder

20
Exploration|Grade 9
Threads of Curiosity
In 2010, scientist J. Craig Venter and his team made an important 
discovery in the field of synthetic biology. They first studied the 
complete DNA sequence of a simple bacterium called Mycoplasma 
mycoides using a computer programming. Then, they chemically 
synthesised (in the laboratory) an exact copy of this DNA.
Next, they took another closely related bacterium and removed its 
DNA, but kept the rest of the cell (such as the cytoplasm and the cell 
membrane) intact. They inserted the synthetic DNA into this cell. After 
this, the cell started to grow and divide, following the instructions 
from the newly inserted synthetic DNA. This experiment showed that 
DNA controls the structure and activities of a cell. 
However, scientists did not create a completely new cell from 
scratch. Only the DNA was synthetic. The other parts of the cell were 
taken from an already existing living cell.
2.4	 How do Normal Cells Grow and Divide?
When you get a small cut on your skin, it heals after a few days. When hair 
fall out, new hair grow back. How does this happen? It happens because 
cells in our body can grow and divide to replace the old, dead, or damaged 
cells. When our body grows, it is not just because cells get bigger. Cells can 
grow only up to a certain size but growth happens because cells divide 
to form new cells. Let us study freshly growing root tips of an onion to 
understand how cells divide (Fig. 2.16).
Activity 2.5: Let us enhance our skills
1.	 Take a jar and fill it up with plain water.
2.	 Now, place an onion bulb over the jar in such a way that its base 
bearing roots, is immersed in the water. 
3.	 Leave the setup for 5–6 days and observe. Do you observe the roots 
growing? Cut 2–3 cm of the freshly grown roots and transfer them 
to freshly prepared aceto-alcohol (glacial acetic acid:ethanol :: 1:3). 
Keep the root tips in aceto-alcohol for 24 hours and then transfer 
them to 70 per cent ethanol (for preservation).
4.	 Take one or two preserved roots, wash them in water and then, place 
them on a clean slide. 
5.	 Put one drop of dilute Hydrochloric acid (HCl) on the root tips to 
soften the tissue. Rinse the roots after 10–15 minutes.  Then add 2–3 
drops of aceto-carmine stain on them. 
6.	 Leave the slide for 5–10 minutes and then, gently warm it (with 
caution) over a spirit lamp.
7.	Cut the tip portion of the root on the slide and put a coverslip. 
Gently squash the coverslip with your thumb to spread the cells 
on the slide.
8.	 Observe the slide under a microscope.
Fig. 2.16: Growing 
roots of an onion in a 
jar containing water

Cell: The Building Block of Life
21
What do you observe? Do you observe the cells of the onion root tip? 
Are they similar in structure? Do you find any structural differences in 
these cells? If yes, why is it so? 
This is because the cells of a growing tip of root of onion divide 
continuously. This process is called cell division. Fig. 2.17 shows various 
stages of cell division. Therefore, these cells exhibit different structures 
corresponding to different stages of cell division. Can you identify which 
stage comes first during cell division? 
Every day, an estimated hundreds of billions of cells in our body are 
replaced, which is almost 1 per cent of the total number of cells in our body. 
Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells divide, but eukaryotic cells divide in 
a more controlled and orderly manner by a process called the cell cycle. 
You will learn about the stages of cell division in higher grades.
Fig. 2.17: Different stages of cell division in onion root tip cells
2.4.1 	Cell division
Cell division is the process by which new cells are formed from 
pre‑existing cells. It allows living organisms to grow, repair damaged 
tissues and reproduce. Some cells, such as skin cells divide continuously 
to replace cells that are lost regularly. There are two major types of 
cell division — mitosis and meiosis. Mitosis is important for normal 
growth, repair, maintenance and asexual reproduction, while meiosis is 
important for sexual reproduction for creation of genetic diversity.
Mitosis
Every human begins life as a single fertilised 
egg. This one cell divides repeatedly to form 
trillions of cells in the body. Cells increase in 
number through mitosis, which is the most 
common type of cell division (Fig. 2.18).
Mitosis produces two genetically identical 
daughter cells from one parent cell. Each new 
cell gets the same DNA and the same number of 
chromosomes as the parent cell. This ensures 
that genetic information is largely maintained 
across body cells.
Fig. 2.18: Mitosis is the process 
that produces two genetically 
identical daughter cells
Next
Level
Up

22
Exploration|Grade 9
Meiosis
Meiosis is a type of cell division that produces gametes 
and occurs only in the cells of reproductive organs. 
Gametes produced for sexual reproduction create 
variations and diversity among living organisms. 
Therefore, children resemble their parents but are 
not exactly the same. In animals including humans, 
meiosis occurs only in the cells of testes of males to 
produce sperm and ovaries of females to produce 
eggs. In plants, meiosis occurs in the anthers (male 
parts) to form pollen grains (that later produce sperm 
cells) and the ovaries (female parts) to produces egg 
cells. In meiosis, the parent cell divides twice, one 
after the other, to form four daughter cells (Fig. 2.19). 
During the first division, the cells divide into two 
daughter cells and the number of chromosomes in 
each daughter cell is reduced to half. The second 
division is similar to mitosis where each daughter cell 
divides into two thus, forming four daughter cells with 
half the number of chromosomes. As a result, each 
gamete has half the number of DNA compared to the 
parent cell. During fertilisation, when gametes from 
two individuals combine, the original chromosome 
number is restored. You will learn about this process 
in detail in Chapter 11.
Scientists have developed methods to grow plant and animal 
cells outside the body in special conditions. This is called cell 
culture. In this process, cells are taken from an organism and 
placed in a nutrient-rich medium that allows them to grow 
and multiply. To keep the culture safe, the right temperature, 
acidic or alkaline conditions and moisture under sterile 
conditions are maintained. Cell culture is crucial for studying 
how cells work and for the production of biochemicals, food, 
medicines, vaccines, and more.
Bridging Science and Society
The processes of mitosis and meiosis must occur in a 
proper and controlled manner. What happens if meiosis 
and mitosis do not happen properly? If there is any error 
in these processes, it can lead to various problems in the 
body of an organism.
Errors in mitosis lead to uncontrolled cell divisions. 
This can lead to the formation of tumours and abnormal 
number of chromosomes in body cells.
Errors in meiosis may result in genetic disorders, 
which may be associated with developmental problems 
or distinctive physical features. Faulty meiosis may also 
cause early pregnancy loss or reduced fertility.
Next
Level
Up
Meet a Scientist
Arun 
Kumar 
Sharma 
was a 
famous 
Indian 
scientist 
known for 
his work on chromosomes. 
As a botanist, he is known 
for his work in the area of 
plant taxonomy, evolution 
and development. He also 
invented many useful 
lab methods to study 
chromosomes in plants. For 
his contributions to botany, 
he received many honours, 
including the Shanti 
Swarup Bhatnagar award 
and Padma Bhushan.
Pause and Ponder
6.	 Instead of many small ones, why 
does a cell not have a single giant 
mitochondrion? How does this 
relate to the concept of surface 
area?
7.	 If the skin cells start dividing by 
meiosis instead of mitosis, what 
do you think will happen to a 
cut on the skin?
Fig. 2.19: Meiosis is a two-step process 
that produces four gametes 

Cell: The Building Block of Life
23
2.5 Cell Theory — The Unifying Principle of Biology
An important observation about living organisms is that all 
organisms are made up of cells. In 1838, a German botanist 
named Matthias Schleiden reported that all plants are made 
up of cells. In 1839, German zoologist Theodor Schwann, found 
that all animals are also made up of cells. Later, in 1855, a 
German scientist named Rudolf Virchow, further expanded 
the Cell Theory by stating that new cells are formed only from 
pre-existing cells. Together, their work led to the formulation of 
the Cell Theory. 
According to the classical Cell Theory:
	y All living organisms are made up of one or more cells.
	y The cell is the basic unit of structure and function in living 
beings.
	y All cells arise from pre-existing cells.
This unifies all biology, from bacteria to humans, and explains 
life’s continuity through cell division.
2.5.1 Do cells grow and reproduce forever?
Cells grow and divide in a controlled way, stay in the right place, 
carry out their functions, and eventually die when they are no 
longer needed. Dead cells are replaced by new cells that carry 
out the same function. Thus, every cell has a definite life span. If 
cells do not die when they should or if they die too early problems 
can arise in the body. In many animal cells, cell division usually 
stops when cells come in contact with neighbouring cells. This 
process is called contact inhibition. However, cancer cells lose 
this control and keep dividing uncontrollably, leading to the 
formation of tumours. Plant cells grow differently. Due to their 
rigid cell walls plant cells do not show contact inhibition and 
follow a different pattern of growth. 
Even though cells are extremely tiny they perform 
remarkable functions. They produce energy, synthesise and 
secrete substances, divide to form new cells, and work together 
to maintain the proper functioning of the body. Every living being 
from a tiny bacterium to a giant tree is made up of cells. You are 
one of the products of these tiny hardworking cells.
Ready to Go Beyond 
How do cells monitor their growth to maintain a balance?
Cells also have natural ways of dying to maintain a balance. 
Programmed Cell Death (PCD) is a genetically regulated and 
organised process of selective cell destruction. It is essential for 
normal development, cellular quality control and immune function. 
When an embryo develops, the PCD helps form fingers by eliminating 
cells between digits, without it we would have webbed hands.
Explore different ways by which cells maintain themselves.
How do cancer cells grow 
and spread? 
Normal cells grow, age 
and die in a controlled 
manner. Sometimes, this 
system breaks down, 
and abnormal cells start 
growing and dividing 
uncontrollably. This 
results in the formation 
of tumours, which may 
be benign or malignant. 
Cancerous tumours can 
invade nearby tissues 
and even spread to other 
parts of the body to form 
new tumours.
Threads of 
Curiosity
Meet a Scientist
In 1902, the 
Austrian 
botanist, 
Gottlieb 
Haberlandt, 
proposed 
that any 
living plant cell, even 
a fully mature cell from 
a permanent tissue, can 
develop into a complete 
plant if it is provided with 
suitable nutrients and 
favourable conditions. He 
suggested that plant cells 
have the ability to form 
different types of cells and 
also change them. This 
special ability of plant 
cells is called totipotency. 
Haberlandt’s idea laid 
the foundation for a new 
branch of biology known 
as Plant Tissue Culture 
Technology.

24
Exploration|Grade 9
At a Glance
	y The cell is the basic structural and functional unit of all living 
organisms.
	y Prokaryotic cells do not have a well-defined nucleus, instead their 
genetic material is present in a region called the nucleoid. They also 
lack membrane-bound organelles. 
	y Eukaryotic cells are larger and more complex. They have a well-
defined nucleus and several membrane-bound organelles. 
	y All cells are surrounded by a cell membrane. In addition, cells 
of plants, fungi and bacteria have a cell wall outside the cell 
membrane.
	y The nucleus of eukaryotic cells contains chromosomes, which are 
composed of DNA and associated proteins, which carry genetic 
information. 
	y All cells are filled with cytoplasm. In eukaryotic cells, cytoplasm 
contains  several  cell  organelles,  each  performing  a  specific  function.
	y Important cell organelles include the nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, 
mitochondria, golgi apparatus, ribosomes and lysosomes. 
	y Plant cells also contain special organelles called plastids, such as 
chloroplasts, leucoplasts and chromoplasts.
	y Mitosis produces two daughter cells identical to the parent cell. 
	y Meiosis is a two-step division process which produces four daughter 
cells, each having half the number of chromosomes. 
	y Normal cells grow in a controlled manner, perform their functions 
and die naturally, while cancer cells lose control and keep dividing 
uncontrollably leading to the formation of tumours.
Revise, Reflect, Refine
1.	 Differentiate between the following pairs of terms based on the clues 
given in parentheses:
	
(i)	 Cell membrane and cell wall (permeability)
	
(ii)	 RER and SER (structure)
	
(iii)	 Chloroplasts and chromoplasts (pigments)
2.	 Two similar animal cells are placed in two different solutions:
	y Cell X is placed in pure water.
	y Cell Y is placed in a concentrated salt solution.

Cell: The Building Block of Life
25
	
Cells are observed after some time. Cell X swells, and Cell Y shrinks. 
Which statement provides the correct explanation for the above 
observations?
	
(i)	 Salt molecules moved into Cell Y, causing it to shrink.
	
(ii)	 Water moved into Cell X and more water moved out of Cell Y than 
the salt solution entered in it. 
	
(iii)	 Water moved into Cell X and moved out of Cell Y through the cell 
membrane.
	
(iv)	 Solute movement caused osmosis in both cells.
3.	 Look at the diagram of a cell in Fig. 2.20. Identify the parts labelled from 
(a) to (g) and correctly match them with their functions given below:
	
(i)	 Controlling all the activities of a cell.
	
(ii)	 Site of cellular respiration.
	
(iii)	 Storage organelle that also provides rigidity to the 
cell.
	
(iv)	 Separates the cell contents from surroundings.
	
(v)	 Provides structural rigidity to the cell.
	
(vi)	 Packs and stores materials received from ER.
	
(vii)	 Helps in manufacturing food.
4.	 Which of the following option(s) of the pairs of cell 
organelles are correctly placed under the given 
categories?
Option
Present in the plant cells
Absent in the animal cells
(i)
Leucoplast
Cell wall
(ii)
Mitochondria
Ribosome
(iii)
Cell wall
Golgi apparatus
(iv)
Lysosome
Endoplasmic reticulum
5.	 Two students, Renu and Rohit, were having a discussion on the plastids. 
Renu emphasised that all parts of the plants, even roots, contain 
plastids. However, Rohit did not agree with the statement and told her 
that plastids are absent in plant roots since the roots are underground 
and do not need to perform photosynthesis. Who is correct? Justify your 
answer.
6.	 Mitochondria and chloroplasts are two important organelles in a plant 
cell. Discuss how these two organelles are structurally and functionally 
similar to each other, and different from each other.
7.	 Which of the following pairs of cell organelles contains DNA? 
	
(i)	 Chloroplasts, Ribosomes
	
(ii)	 Mitochondria, Nucleus
	
(iii)	 Golgi bodies, Ribosomes
	
(iv)	 Nucleus, Lysosomes
(a)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2.20

26
Exploration|Grade 9
8.	 A researcher carried out an experiment in which she took two carrots 
of similar size. She placed one carrot in plain water and the other carrot 
in concentrated salt solution (Fig. 2.21). After 24 hours she recorded her 
observations.
	
(i)	 What hypothesis does she want to test through this experiment?
	
(ii)	 What would you suggest for the improvement of this experiment?
	
(iii)	 Why does the carrot in plain water stay stiff and crunchy, but the 
carrot in concentrated salt solution become rubbery and limp?
9.	 Indicate the presence or absence of following structures in bacterial 
and animal cells: 
Structures in a cell
Bacterial cell
Animal cell
Chromosome
Nucleus
Mitochondria
Golgi complex
Chromoplasts
10.	Carry out the following experiment:
	
Take four peeled potato halves and scoop each one out to make potato 
cups. One of these potato cups should be made from a boiled potato. 
Place each of the potato cups in a beaker containing water (Fig. 2.22). 
Now, set up the experiment as follows:
	
(a)	Keep Cup A empty.
	
(b)	Add one teaspoon sugar in Cup B.
	
(c)	 Add one teaspoon salt in Cup C.
	
(d)	Add one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato in Cup D.
	
Observe the four potato cups at least two hours and answer the following 
questions:
	
(i)	 Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of Cup B and 
Cup C.
	
(ii)	 Why is Cup A necessary for this experiment?
	
(iii)	 Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed portions of 
Cups A and D.
11.	Identify the pair that incorrectly matches the cell organelle with 
its function.
	
(i)	 Ribosome — Protein synthesis
	
(ii)	 SER — Lipid and cellulose synthesis
	
(iii)	 Lysosome — Digestion of foreign agents
12.	What outcome do you expect, if all the mitochondria are removed from 
a eukaryotic cell?
13.	Which phenomenon inhibits the formation of tumors in the human 
body? Can plants also develop tumors? Explain.
A
B
Fig. 2.21: Experimental 
set-up having carrot 
(a) in plain water, and 
(b) in salt solution
Fig. 2.22: Experimental 
set-up

Cell: The Building Block of Life
27
The Journey Beyond
	y Use selected software or digital tools to create animations or simulations 
of cell division and share them in the class.
	y Create a model of any type of a ‘synthetic cell’ using low-cost eco-friendly 
material. 
	y Build a mitosis or meiosis model with your classmates for your science 
project or exhibition. How did teamwork contribute to the success of 
the activity? Did this activity change your perspective or understanding 
of the cell division topic in any way? If so, explain how? 
	y Develop a nukkad natak for community awareness in simple dialogues 
about the different functions of cell organelles.
14.	The cell membrane of a cell is made up of proteins and lipids. Which 
cell organelles help in the synthesis of cell membrane? Write the path of 
these compounds from their site of synthesis to the cell membrane and 
show this through a labelled diagram. 
15.	What would happen if gametes are formed by mitotic divisions?
16.	A farmer, Deepa, was very happy with the harvest of amla (Indian 
Gooseberry) and lemons on her farm. However, she could sell only one-
fourth of the produce in the local market. Recognising that a significant 
amount of produce may be lost post-harvest, she employed a traditional 
yet scientifically sound method to extend the shelf life of amla and 
lemons. She turned perishable produce into profitable products, such 
as pickles and sharbat. She used the excess produce to prepare pickles, 
murabbas, and sharbat by adding appropriate amounts of salt, sugar, 
or jaggery to small pieces of fruit and their juices. These were then 
stored in small glass bottles for sale, helping her prevent the wastage 
of post-harvest produce. This shift from farming to agro-processing 
would strengthen food security and boost the local economy, creating a 
sustainable model that cuts waste while increasing her income. Based 
on the above passage answer the following questions:
	
(i)	 Which scientific concept has the farmer applied in the preservation 
of the farm produce? 
	
(ii)	 How does the addition of high concentrations of salt and sugar 
create an environment that prevents the growth of spoilage-causing 
bacteria and fungi?
	
(iii)	 Suggest a healthy recipe of this kind for food preservation. 
	
(iv)	 What are the scientific values addressed in this case?
What is the future of the development of synthetic cells using non-living chemicals? 
If a synthetic cell is developed, what may be the related ethical issues?
The Quest Continues …
