Sound Waves: 
Characteristics and 
Applications
Chapter 
10
Sound is an everyday sensory experience that helps us become 
aware of our surroundings. Every day, we hear a variety of sounds 
in our surroundings, such as human voices, birds chirping, 
waves crashing on the seashore, leaves rustling, mobile phones 
ringing, vehicles honking, music, and the claps of thunder. You 
have learnt in Chapter 7 that sound is a form of energy. You have 
also learnt that energy can neither be created nor be destroyed. 
It only changes from one form to another. Which form of energy 
gets converted to sound energy? How is sound produced and how 
does it reach our ears? In this chapter, we will try to find the 
answers to these questions. 
10.1 Production of Sound
You learnt a few ways to produce sound in 
your textbooks for arts in the earlier grades.
Grade 3
Bansuri I
Chapter 9     
Grade 4
Bansuri
Chapter 13     
Grade 5
Bansuri
Chapter 12     
Grade 6
Kriti I
Chapter 7
Do you also remember learning about 
sonority earlier, a property of some metals 
where sound is produced when struck with 
an object (Fig. 10.1)? 
Fig. 10.1: Taal a 
musical instrument 
Grade 7
Curiosity
Chapter 4
Think It Over
	y
Two astronauts are 
repairing the arm 
of a space station 
together during 
a spacewalk. Can 
they talk to each 
other and hear the 
sounds of metal 
clanking as they do 
on the Earth?
	y
How do most bats 
use sound to locate 
their prey in the 
dark at night?
Chapter 

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
185
Activity 10.1: Let us explore
1.	 Take a cardboard box with one side open 
and a rubber band.
2.	 Stretch the rubber band across the open 
side of the box (Fig. 10.2). 
3.	 Holding the box steady with one hand, 
pluck the rubber band with a finger. Do 
you hear any sound?
4.	 Pluck the rubber band again and watch it 
carefully. Is it vibrating? 
5.	 Wait till the rubber band stops vibrating. 
Do you still hear the sound?
6.	 Change the tension in the rubber band by 
stretching it more or loosening it slightly and plucking it each time. 
Does the sound change? What changes do you notice?
7.	 Remove the rubber band from the box. Stretch it between two fingers 
and pluck it near your ear. Is the sound still produced? Is it as loud as 
before?
You may have noticed that as long as the rubber band is stretched and 
vibrating, sound is produced. Once the vibration stops, so does the sound. 
From this activity, we conclude that sound is produced by vibrations. 
Vibration refers to the periodic to and fro motion (oscillations) of an object. 
Pulling a stretched string or striking a metal object makes them vibrate, 
which produces sound. Likewise, when you blow through a bansuri (flute), 
vibration of the air inside the hollow pipe produces sound. You have 
learnt earlier that some of these methods are used in a variety of musical 
instruments. Sound can be produced by vibrating strings membranes, air 
columns, and many other vibrating objects. In most musical instruments, 
more than one vibrating part is involved in producing sound. The object 
that produces sound is called the ‘source’ of the sound.
How do humans and animals create sound? 
While talking or singing, gently touch your 
throat. Do you feel vibrations anywhere? In 
humans and some other animals, sound is 
produced by the vibration of vocal cords, 
which are tightly stretched muscular flaps 
located inside the voice box or larynx, 
in the throat (Fig. 10.3). The tongue, lips, 
mouth and nasal cavity in humans help in 
converting sound into speech or music. 
Some 
animals 
produce 
sound 
by 
striking or rubbing certain body parts. For 
example, grasshoppers and crickets rub 
their wings or legs to produce sound.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 10.3: Vocal cords in humans
Vocal 
cords 
Larynx
Vocal cords 
open
Vocal cords 
closed
Fig. 10.2: Vibrating rubber 
band produces sound
Grade 4
Bansuri
Chapter 13

186
Exploration|Grade 9
10.1.1 Tuning fork
An instrument that is often used for experiments with sound is a tuning 
fork. A tuning fork is a U-shaped metal bar with a stem. It is usually 
made of steel or aluminium. The sides of the ‘U’ are called prongs or tines 
(Fig. 10.4a) which are struck on a pad to make them vibrate.
Activity 10.2: Let us explore
1.	 Take a tuning fork and a soft rubber pad.
2.	 Hold the tuning fork by its stem. 
3.	 Strike one of the prongs of the tuning fork gently against the rubber 
pad (Fig. 10.4b) and bring it close to your ear. Do you hear a sound? 
(Take care not to strike the tuning fork against a hard surface). 
4.	 Now, gently touch a water surface with one of the vibrating prongs of 
the tuning fork. Do you see waves forming on the surface of water?
5.	 Repeat step 3 a few times while bringing the prongs of the tuning fork 
near your ear in different orientations. Do you hear the sound?
When you bring a vibrating tuning fork near your ear you hear the 
sound that is produced. When the prong touches the surface of water, 
waves form on the surface of water, indicating that the prongs of the tuning 
fork are indeed vibrating (Fig. 10.4c). These observations support the idea 
that sound is produced by vibrating objects.
1.	 Explore various ways of producing sound.
2.	 Make a list of different types of musical instruments and identify their 
vibrating parts which produce sound.
Pause and Ponder
What if your name were a tune instead of a word? In Kongthong, a 
village near Shillong in Meghalaya also known as the Whistling Village 
every person has a ‘tune name’ that can be sung or whistled. This unique 
tradition, called Jingrwai Iawbei, begins at birth when a mother composes 
a lullaby-like tune for her child.
Threads of Curiosity
10.2 Propagation of Sound
You have seen that sound is produced by vibrating objects. How does sound 
reach your ear from the source? Sound travels through air but does it also 
travel through solids and liquids?
Activity 10.3: Let us investigate
1.	 You and your friend stand on opposite sides of a desk in the classroom. 
Let your friend gently knock or scratch on the desk. Listen carefully to 
the sound produced with your ear in the air.
Fig. 10.4: (c) A prong 
of vibrating tuning 
fork touching the 
surface of water
Fig. 10.4: (b) Striking a 
tuning fork against a 
rubber pad
Fig. 10.4: (a) A tuning 
fork and a rubber pad
Prongs
Rubber pad
Stem

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
187
2.	 Now, place your ear against the desk, close 
your other ear and listen again, as shown 
in Fig. 10.5. Are you able to hear the sound 
through the table?
This shows that sound can also travel through 
solids.
Activity 10.4: Let us investigate
1.	 Take a large tub or bucket of water filled to the 
brim and two metal spoons.
2.	 Tap the spoons against one another and listen to the sound 
produced (Fig. 10.6a).
3.	 Now, submerge the two metal spoons in water without touching 
the sides or bottom of the bucket and tap them against one another 
again (Fig. 10.6b). Do you again hear the sound produced?
The sound of the submerged spoons tells you that the sound has 
reached you after travelling through water and air. If sound did not 
travel through liquids, would you have heard this sound?
Sound can travel or propagate through solids, liquids and gases. The 
material through which sound propagates is called a medium. Sound 
propagates from its source to you through a medium. But suppose 
that there is no medium in the space between you and the source of 
the sound. A space where there is no medium (matter) is referred to as 
vacuum. Would you hear sound in vacuum?
10.2.1 Sound needs a medium to propagate
A common experiment to show that sound needs a medium to 
propagate is the vacuum bell jar experiment shown in Fig. 10.7. An 
electric bell kept in a bell jar is switched on and the loudness of the 
sound is noted. As air is sucked out from the bell jar using a vacuum 
pump, the sound becomes fainter. Once a near 
vacuum is reached, almost no sound can be heard 
even though the bell can be seen ringing. When air 
is let back into the jar, the sound can be heard again 
and it gradually becomes as loud as before.
This experiment shows that sound cannot 
propagate in vacuum. Sound needs a medium to 
propagate. The medium can be a solid, a liquid, or 
a gas.
In outer space, there is a near vacuum, and 
thus, sound cannot propagate. Hence, astronauts in 
spacesuits doing spacewalks cannot directly hear each 
other speak or hear sounds like two metal objects 
clanking together. Instead, they communicate through 
special devices fitted into their spacesuits.
Fig. 10.5: Investigating if sound travels 
through solid objects
Fig. 10.6: Tapping two 
spoons against each other 
in (a) air, and (b) water
(a)
(b)
Fig. 10.7: Illustration of a vacuum 
bell jar
Electric 
bell 
To power 
supply
To vacuum 
pump
Bell jar

188
Exploration|Grade 9
3.	 Assertion (A): We cannot hear the sound of a bell ringing in a closed jar 
after most of the air is pumped out.
	
Reason (R):  Sound requires a medium to travel.
	
Choose the correct statement:
	
(i)	 Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
	
(ii)	 Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
	 (iii)	 A is true, but R is false.
	 (iv)	 A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
10.3 Sound Waves
Sound needs a material medium to propagate but how does it propagate 
through that medium? In Activity 10.2, you could hear a sound when you 
held the vibrating tuning fork near your ear in different orientations. This 
indicates that sound propagates in multiple directions from a source (in 
this case from the tuning fork). In general, the directions in which sound 
propagates may depend on the shape of the source. However, for simplicity, 
we will consider and illustrate sound as moving in only one direction.
Let us begin with a simple activity using a slinky (a long, flexible metal 
or plastic spring toy) as an analogy for the medium through which sound 
travels. To simulate the production of sound, we will vibrate one end of 
the slinky.
Activity 10.5: Let us observe
1.	 Take a slinky and a marker.
2.	 Make a mark on a turn of the slinky with the marker. Lay out the slinky 
horizontally on a table or floor. 
3.	 Ask a friend to hold one end of the slinky fixed while you hold the 
other end keeping the slinky slightly stretched. 
4.	 Give the slinky at your end a sharp push towards your friend and then 
quickly pull it back again (Fig. 10.8). Do you observe a disturbance 
created in the slinky which moves towards your friend?
5.	 Now, push and pull the slinky end multiple times in quick succession 
(The pulling and pushing of the end of the slinky is similar to the sound 
being produced continuously). Are a series of disturbances produced 
in the slinky? Do these disturbances move across the length of slinky? 
Does the mark on the slinky move back and forth parallel to the 
direction of the disturbance?
Fig. 10.8: Disturbance travelling along a slinky
Turns are closer 
together
Turns are more  
spread out

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
189
Fig. 10.9: Density of air in a tube with a piston
(a) Piston not oscillating (average air density in the 
entire tube)
(b) Forward motion of piston produces a compression 
(region of air with a higher density)
C
(c) Backward motion of piston produces a rarefaction 
(region of air with a lower density)
C
R
(d) Oscillating piston produces alternate compressions 
and rarefactions
C
C
R
R
You observe regions in the slinky where its turns are closer together 
than usual, and other regions where they are more spread out. These 
closely spaced and spread out regions appear to travel along the slinky. 
However, the mark does not travel along the slinky, it only oscillates about 
its position of rest parallel to the direction of the disturbance. Each turn 
oscillates about its own position while the disturbance travels from one 
end of the slinky to the other.
Sound moves in a similar way through a medium. In our analogy, the 
closeness or spreading out of the turns of the slinky represents the higher 
or lower density of air through which sound is travelling. Let us consider 
a long tube filled with air that has a piston at one end and is open at the 
other. The piston can be made to oscillate back and forth inside the tube. 
Here, the oscillating piston is used as a simple 
and idealistic model of the source of sound to 
help understand how sound travels through air.
When the piston is not oscillating, the air 
inside the tube has a certain uniform density, 
which we call the average density (Fig. 10.9a), 
where the dots represent the air particles. As the 
piston moves forward, it pushes and displaces 
the nearby air particles in a forward direction, 
thereby compressing the air and increasing 
its density in a small region close to the piston 
(Fig. 10.9b). This region of air with higher 
density (compared to the average density) is 
called a compression (C).
The compressed air particles collide with the 
particles further ahead passing the compression 
forward. The compressed particles further 
collide with their neighbouring particles, and so 
on. As a result, the higher density compression 
moves forward through the air even though the 
air particles themselves do not travel with it.
As the piston moves backwards, the air particles move backwards in 
the direction of the piston and the air in a small region close to the piston 
becomes less dense (Fig. 10.9c). This region of air with lower density 
(compared to the average density) is called a rarefaction (R). Again, due 
to collisions with nearby particles, the rarefaction moves ahead while the 
particles themselves oscillate only about their mean positions. 
As the piston oscillates in forward and backward directions, 
compressions and rarefactions are produced alternately (Fig. 10.9d). These 
travel away from the source, and a series of compression and rarefaction 
are produced. 
The disturbance consisting of a series of alternating compressions and 
rarefactions propagating through a medium, without the actual flow of the 
particles of medium, is called a sound wave. The direction in which the 
wave travels is known as the direction of propagation of the wave.
Note
The particles 
of the medium 
do not travel 
with the wave. 
They just 
vibrate about 
their mean 
positions.

190
Exploration|Grade 9
When the medium is not confined to a 
tube, its vibrating particles collide with the 
surrounding particles in all directions, and 
thus, the sound wave spreads out in all 
directions. A small sound source continuously 
producing sound in all directions causes 
compressions and rarefactions that spread 
through the surrounding medium in all 
directions as spherical waves (Fig. 10.10). 
When they reach the listener, they are 
perceived as sound.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Fig. 10.10: Sound from a 
point source propagates in all 
directions as spherical waves
Point 
Source
Threads of Curiosity
What causes sudden loud sounds, such as 
when firecrackers explode or during a clap 
of thunder? These sounds are produced in a 
slightly different way. When air or gases are 
heated rapidly, they expand very rapidly in 
a short time. This rapid expansion creates a 
sudden disturbance in the air density that 
travels outward. When this disturbance reaches 
our ears, we perceive it as a loud sound pulse.
A similar but more complex disturbance is produced when a supersonic 
aircraft (Fig. 10.11) flies at a speed higher than the speed of sound, creating 
a loud sound known as a sonic boom.
Fig. 10.11: A supersonic 
aircraft
Did you notice (Fig. 10.9) that the displacement of the medium is parallel 
to the direction of wave propagation? In sound waves, the particles of the 
medium vibrate back and forth parallel to the direction of propagation 
of disturbance (Fig. 10.12). Such waves where the particles vibrate in a 
direction parallel to the direction of the wave propagation are known as 
longitudinal waves.
Direction of particle vibration
Direction of wave 
propagation
Fig. 10.12: A longitudinal wave
If there is no medium (i.e., no particles), is the propagation of sound 
waves possible? Without a material medium, sound waves cannot 
propagate. Waves that require a material medium for propagation are 
called mechanical waves. Sound wave is a type of a mechanical wave.

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
191
Mechanical 
waves 
are 
of 
two 
types: 
longitudinal waves and transverse waves. 
Sound wave is an example of a longitudinal 
wave where the particles vibrate parallel to 
the direction of the wave propagation. In a 
transverse wave, the particles vibrate in a 
direction perpendicular to the direction of 
wave propagation (Fig. 10.13).
Earthquakes produce seismic waves that travel through the Earth. These waves 
could be longitudinal or transverse. The longitudinal seismic waves are the first to be 
detected by seismographs that detect the earthquakes.
Not all waves are mechanical waves, i.e., not all waves need a medium to 
propagate. Light, which is a transverse wave, can travel through vacuum. This is 
why light from the Sun and other stars can reach the Earth. You will study waves 
in more detail in higher grades.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Next
Level
Up
Fig. 10.13: Transverse Wave
Direction of particle 
vibration
Direction of wave 
propagation
4.	 Assertion (A): Compressions and rarefactions move through the medium.
	
Reason (R): Individual particles of the medium continuously move forward with 
the wave.
	
Choose the correct statement:
	
(i)	 Both A and R are true, but R is not the correct explanation of A.
	
(ii)	 Both A and R are true, and R is the correct explanation of A.
	 (iii)	 A is true, but R is false.
	 (iv)	 A is false, but R is true.
Pause and Ponder
10.4 Energy of Sound Waves
Activity 10.6: Let us experiment
1.	 Take a wide mouthed container, a cellophane or 
rubber sheet (such as that of a balloon) of size 
larger than its opening, a loud sound source 
(such as a metal plate and a beater) and some 
grains or particles (such as rice, semolina, salt, 
or chalk powder). 
2.	 Stretch the sheet over the edges of the container 
tightly and fix it with tape or a rubber band 
(Fig. 10.14). 
3.	 Sprinkle the grains evenly over the sheet, 
ensuring they are not clumped together. 
4.	 Produce a loud sound near the bowl without 
touching it. Observe the grains on the sheet. 
Does the sound have any effect on the grains?
Fig. 10.14: Sound moving grains 
(coloured)

192
Exploration|Grade 9
5.	 Repeat step 4 with different sources of sounds and observe the effect 
on the grains. You can try increasing or reducing the volume of sound. 
Try with different grains.
Do you observe the grains over the sheet move or jump? Why does this 
happen, even though the source of sound is not touching the sheet or the 
container? As sound propagates through air, it reaches the sheet and makes 
it vibrate. This vibration causes the grains to move. 
This shows that sound is a form of energy. When the source of sound 
vibrates, it transfers energy to the surrounding medium. As sound waves 
propagate in a medium, the vibration of particles of the medium and their 
collisions with other particles result in the transfer of energy.
Microphones (Fig. 10.15a) that help 
us capture sound from various 
sources convert sound energy to 
electrical energy. When we speak or 
sing into a microphone, the sound 
waves make a thin membrane, 
called a diaphragm, vibrate. These 
vibrations 
are 
converted 
into 
an electrical signal. A speaker 
(Fig. 10.15b) does the opposite; an electrical signal makes a 
cone or diaphragm attached inside the speaker vibrate, which 
produces sound. If all components work properly, the sound 
from the speaker closely matches the originally captured sound. 
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 10. 15: (a) A microphone, 
(b) a speaker
(a)
(b)
Pause and Ponder
5.	 When sound travels from a tuning fork to your ear, which of the 
following actually reaches your ear?
	
(i)	 Air particles near the tuning fork
	
(ii)	 Energy carried by sound waves
	 (iii)	 The tuning fork material
	 (iv)	 A continuous stream of compressed air
10.5 Graphical Representation of a Sound Wave
As a sound wave propagates, at any given instant of time the density of 
the medium varies periodically with distance from the source. Fig. 10.16a 
shows the periodic variation of density with distance at any given instant 
of time. The graph corresponding to it is shown in Fig. 10.16b where the 
distance is plotted on the x-axis, while the density of the medium is plotted 
on the y-axis. The average density is marked as a horizontal dashed line. 
The density varies (above and below the average density) with distance at 
a given instant of time.
Note
In the 
propagation 
of a sound 
wave, it is the 
energy that is 
transferred, not 
the particles of 
the medium.
Particles in a medium 
are never truly at 
rest. They are always 
randomly vibrating 
due to thermal energy. 
When a sound wave 
passes through the 
medium, it temporarily 
increases the vibration 
of these particles. After 
the wave passes, the 
particles return to their 
usual random motion.
Ready to Go 
Beyond 

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
193
Another way to make a graphical representation of a sound wave is to plot the 
variation of density of the medium with time, at a particular location in the medium.
Ready to Go Beyond 
In the region of a compression, the density of the medium increases 
above the average density and the highest point represents the maximum 
density (Fig. 10.16b). Thereafter, the density decreases and eventually falls 
below the average density in the region of rarefaction and the lowest point 
represents the minimum density. The highest point is called the crest and 
the lowest point is called the trough of the wave.
6.	 The variation of density of the medium for two sound waves is shown in Fig. 10.17 (a) 
and (b). Label compression and rarefaction by C and R on it. In the graph given in Fig. 10.17 
(c) and (d), label the axes and draw the curves corresponding to Fig. 10.17 (a) and (b).
Pause and Ponder
Fig. 10.17: Drawing graph to represent the variation of density of the medium for two sound waves
(c)
(a)
(d)
(b)
Fig. 10.16: For a sound wave (a) variation of density of medium, 
(b) graphical representation of variation of density with distance
Density
Above average density
Below average density
Average density
Distance
Crest
Trough
(a)
(b)
C
R
C
R
C
R
Crest
Crest
Trough
Trough

194
Exploration|Grade 9
10.6 Characteristics of a Sound Wave
10.6.1 Wavelength, frequency and time period
Let us learn about some quantities which are used to describe a 
sound wave. The distance between the two consecutive crests or 
two consecutive troughs is called the wavelength of a wave. This 
is shown in Fig. 10.18 where two sound waves are shown with long 
and short wavelengths. The wavelength is usually represented by 
λ (Greek letter lambda). Its SI unit is the metre (m). 
Another characteristic of sound wave is how often the density 
variations occur at a given position in the medium when a sound 
wave passes through that position. The density of the medium at 
the given position changes alternately between a maximum density 
(crest) and a minimum density (trough). The change in the density of 
the medium at a fixed point, from maximum to minimum and then 
again to maximum (or vice versa), makes one complete oscillation.
The number of density oscillations at a fixed point per unit time 
is the frequency of the sound wave. It is usually represented by 
ν  (Greek letter nu). Its SI unit is per second ( or s–1) also called a 
hertz (symbol Hz). 
The time taken for one complete density oscillation at a fixed 
point is defined as the time period of the wave. The time period of 
the wave is represented by the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s). 
The time period and frequency are inversely related; a shorter 
time period corresponds to a higher frequency.
	
	
	
	
T
ν = 1 	
(10.1)
Usually, everyday sounds contain a mixture of many frequencies. 
Nearly single frequency sounds can be made by striking a tuning 
fork (Section 10.1.1) or by oral whistling.
Activity 10.7: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group 
activity facilitated by the teacher.
1.	 Use a mobile app, such as Phyphox that can identify frequencies 
of sounds. Use the ‘Audio Spectrum’ option that displays the 
frequency graphically or in hertz (Hz). 
2.	 Try to sing the musical notes ‘Sa, Re, Ga, Ma, Pa, Dha, Ni, Sa’ one 
after another, or use a music or tone generating app on another 
phone to produce those notes. Observe how the frequency 
changes as each note is produced. 
3.	 Record the approximate frequency values for each musical 
note.
4.	 Compare the musical notes by taking the ratio of each frequency 
with respect to the ‘Sa’. Do you observe any pattern?
5.	 If both voice and mobile-generated notes are used, compare 
their frequencies for the same musical notes. 
Fig. 10.18: Sound waves 
(b) Short wavelength
Density
C R C R C R C R C R C R
Distance
(a) Long wavelength
Density
Distance
C 
R 
C 
R
Threads of 
Curiosity
There are some free 
apps which can be 
used by the teacher 
to produce as well as 
identify the sounds of 
different frequencies. 
Phyphox is one such 
app. In fact, using 
the ‘Audio Scope’ in 
the Phyphox app and 
whistling carefully 
will often produce a 
graph like Fig. 10.18 
indicating that it 
is almost a single 
frequency sound.
λ
λ
λ
λ

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
195
Density
Distance
Amplitude
Density
Distance
Amplitude
C 
R 
C 
R 
C 
R
C 
R 
C 
R 
C 
R
Fig. 10.20: Sound waves
(a) Low amplitude
(b) High amplitude
In this activity, you would have noticed that the frequency is lowest for 
the ‘Sa’ and gradually increases for the other notes. Each musical note has 
a distinct frequency, which makes it sound different. You can use the app 
to compare the frequencies of other sounds, including the voices of your 
friends too.
Example 10.1: If there are 10 density oscillations in 2 seconds at a given 
position, then calculate the (i) frequency of sound wave, and (ii) its time 
period.
Answer: 
number of oscillations
10
 Frequency of sound wave = 
 = 
 = 5 Hz
time taken
2 s
Time taken for a single density oscillation at a position = 2 s
 
 = 0.2 s
10
7.	 Conduct Activity 10.1 once again with a thick rubber 
band and then with a thin rubber band. Does the 
thin rubber band vibrate faster than the thick 
rubber band? If yes, how do the frequency and time 
period of the sound produced by the thin rubber 
band differ from that of the thick rubber band? 
8.	 If the frequency of a sound wave produced by an 
oscillating piston of a long tube filled with air is 
20 Hz, then how many oscillations does the piston 
complete per minute?
9.	 For the sound wave represented by the graph shown 
in Fig. 10.19, what is half of its wavelength?
Pause and Ponder
Density
Distance (cm)
0
1.5
3.0
4.5
Fig. 10.19: Graphical representation 
of a sound wave
10.6.2 Amplitude and intensity of the sound waves
Sound propagates as density 
oscillations of the medium via 
compressions and rarefactions. 
The amplitude of a sound wave 
is the maximum change in the 
density of air in a compression 
(or a rarefaction) compared to 
the average density. A larger 
change in density corresponds 
to a larger amplitude (Fig. 10.20). 
The 
amplitude 
and 
the 
amount of energy a wave carries 
are related. A wave with a larger amplitude carries more energy than the one 
with a smaller amplitude. This can be seen in Activity 10.6. When the plate 
is struck harder, more energy is transferred to the particles of surrounding 
medium, causing larger displacements from their mean positions. As a result, 
the sheet vibrates to a larger displacement and the grains jump higher.
The amount of sound energy passing through a unit area perpendicular 
to the direction of the propagation of sound wave in a unit time is called the 
intensity of sound.

196
Exploration|Grade 9
As sound wave travels away from its source, 
it spreads over a larger area (Fig. 10.21). Since the 
energy must be conserved, the same amount of 
energy is now spread over a larger area. Hence, 
the intensity decreases with distance from the 
source. Sounds produced with initial larger 
amplitude carry more energy and can travel a 
larger distance before intensity reduces to zero.
10.6.3 Speed of Sound
The speed of sound describes how fast sound waves propagate through a 
medium. In terms of compressions and rarefactions, one can think of speed 
as how fast these density disturbances propagate through the medium. The 
speed of sound can be defined as the distance which a point on a wave, 
such as a crest (or a trough), travels in unit time. 
For a sound wave of given frequency, the distance between two 
consecutive crests (or two consecutive troughs) is one wavelength ( λ ). This 
distance is covered by the disturbance in one time period (T ). Therefore, 
the speed of sound (v ) is
distance
speed =  
time
                           ⇒    v
T
λ
=
We know that frequency 
T
ν = 1 (Eq. 10.1). Thus, 
	
	
	
	
         
λ
ν
×
v =  
 
(10.2)
speed = wavelength × frequency
The speed of sound depends on the medium through which it 
travels. It travels fastest in solids, slower in liquids, and slowest in gases. 
For example, sound travels about 4 – 5 times faster in water and typically 
15 – 20 times faster in solids than in the air. 
The speed of sound in air also depends on the temperature and humidity. 
As we increase the temperature or humidity, the speed of sound increases. 
For example, the speed of sound in dry air is about 331 m s–1 at 0 ºC and 
nearly 344 m s–1 at 22 ºC. 
In most media, such as air the speed of sound depends only on the medium 
and not the source or the frequency. If the frequency of the source changes, 
the wavelength of the sound wave in the medium changes, while the 
speed remains constant. Some special materials, such as porous foams or 
engineered structures can behave differently.
Ready to Go Beyond 
Example 10.2: Human hearing roughly spans 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are 
the corresponding wavelengths in air for these two frequencies? Use the 
speed of sound in air as 344 m s–1.
Answer: Using the relation between wavelength (λ ), frequency (ν ), and 
speed (v ),
speed of the wave = frequency × wavelength
What if …
the speed of 
sound in air 
depended on 
its frequency? 
Would music still 
sound pleasant 
when a singer 
performs with 
instruments? 
Why or why not?
Point source
Fig. 10.21: Sound energy spreading 
over a larger area with distance

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
197
λ
speed of the wave
Therefore, wavelength  =  
frequency
	
(i)	 For ν = 20 Hz,        λ
−
−
1
1
344 m s
 =  
 = 17.2 m 
20 s
	
(ii)	For ν = 20 kHz = 20000 Hz, 	     λ
−
−
1
1
344 m s
 =  
 = 0.0172 m = 1.72 cm
20000 s
The wavelength of sound in air corresponding to the frequency (i) 20 Hz is 
17.2 m, and (ii) 20000 Hz is 1.72 cm.
Example 10.3: During a thunderstorm, lightning is seen before thunder 
is heard because sound travels much slower than light. If the time delay 
between seeing the lightning flash and hearing the thunder is measured to 
be 5 s, estimate the distance to the lightning strike. Use the speed of sound 
in air as 340 m s–1. Assume that light (speed = 300000 km s–1) reaches you 
almost instantaneously.
Answer: Distance = v × t = 340 m s–1 × 5 s = 1700 m 
Lightning struck about 1.7 km away.
Example 10.4: From the graphical representation of 
a sound wave propagating in steel (Fig. 10.22), find its 
wavelength. Calculate its frequency and time period if 
the speed of sound in steel is 5000 m s–1.
Answer: From graph (Fig. 10.22), the wavelengthλ = 50 m 
Using Eq. (10.2), the frequency of the sound wave is
ν
λ
−1
5000 m s
 =
= 
 = 100 Hz
50 m
v
Using Eq. (10.1), the time period of the sound wave is
ν
1
1
=   = 
 = 0.01 s 
100 Hz
T
10.	 Table 10.1 shows the speed of sound in a few media at atmospheric pressure. 
	
Table 10.1: Speed of sound in different media at 15 °C
	
State
Substance/Medium
Approximate speed 
Solid
Steel
5000 m s–1
Liquid
Water
1500 m s–1
Gas
Air
340 m s–1
	
Compare the speeds in different media by finding the ratio of 
	
	(i)	 the speed of sound in water with respect to the speed in the air.
	
	(ii)	 the speed of sound in steel with respect to the speed in the water.
Pause and Ponder
Density
Distance (m)
0
25
50
75
Fig. 10.22: Graphical representation of a 
sound wave 

198
Exploration|Grade 9
11.	 Two friends are standing along a steel 
fence at a distance of 340 m from each 
other (Fig. 10.23). Gunjan places her ear 
over the fence and her friend knocks 
the fence with a metal object. Using the 
values of the speed of sound in steel 
and air given in Table 10.1, calculate 
the time difference between the sound 
that reached Gunjan through the air 
and the steel. Would it have been possible for her to distinguish between the two 
sounds? (The time interval between two sounds must be at least 0.1 s to be heard 
separately.)
Fig. 10.23: Time difference between the 
sound reaching through air and steel
10.6.4 Human perception of sound
The physical properties of sound, such as time period, wavelength, 
frequency, amplitude and speed are well-defined and can be measured. 
However, how we experience sound is subjective. Human perception of 
sound is described by terms, such as loudness and pitch which do not have 
simple relations with the physical properties.
Pitch
How frequency is perceived by humans is called pitch. Sounds perceived 
to be shrill, such as a whistle or a siren are said to have high pitch, while 
deep sounds like thunder or an aircraft rumble have low pitch. In general, 
high pitch sounds have higher frequency and low pitch sounds have lower 
frequency, although the exact mathematical relation is complicated. 
Threads of Curiosity
Everyone’s voice sounds unique and you can often instantly recognise your teacher 
or friends calling out your name. Why do our voices sound different? Male, female, 
and children’s voices differ not just in their frequency but also on how the sound is 
shaped by the throat, mouth, and nasal cavities. During adolescence, boys’ vocal cords 
of boys lengthen and thicken, vibrating less frequently thus, ‘deepening’ their voice.
Let us carry out an activity to listen and appreciate sounds at different 
frequencies.
Activity 10.8: Let us experiment (demonstration activity)
This activity is recommended to be performed as a classroom group activity 
facilitated by teacher.
1.	 Open a mobile app that can generate sounds.
2.	 Set the frequency to 100 Hz, tap ‘play’, and listen carefully.
3.	 Increase the frequency in steps of 100 Hz up to 1000 Hz and describe 
how the sound changes. 
4.	 Next, set the frequency to 50 Hz. Reduce the frequency till about 20 Hz 
or the point where you cannot hear the sound anymore.

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
199
Can humans hear all sounds? Humans can only hear a limited range of 
sound frequencies. The audible range or the human hearing range is from 
20 Hz to 20,000 Hz (20 kHz). However, this range varies from person to 
person and decreases with age. Sound waves with frequency below 20 Hz 
are called infrasonic waves, while sound waves with frequency above 
20 kHz are called ultrasonic waves. Humans cannot hear infrasound or 
ultrasound but some animals can. Dogs, cats, bats, dolphins can detect 
ultrasound, while elephants can detect infrasound.
Loudness
Humans perceive the amplitude of a sound wave as loudness. Sounds with 
larger amplitude are heard louder, while those with smaller amplitude 
sound softer. The loudness decreases as we move farther away from the 
source.
In everyday language, loudness and intensity are often used 
interchangeably. However, intensity is a measurable quantity, whereas 
loudness depends on the listener’s hearing ability.
Sound loudness is commonly measured in decibels (dB). Very soft sounds like rustling 
leaves are around a few dB, normal conversation is about 60 dB, while very loud 
sounds, such as firecrackers can exceed 100 dB. Even a small increase in the dB level 
means a large increase in the sound intensity.
Unwanted or harmful sound is called noise. Noise pollution is a severe problem.
Exposure to sound levels above recommended limits, especially for long durations 
can affect health, sleep, and hearing. Prolonged exposure to loud sound can lead to 
hearing loss, which can be tested using audiograms. People with hearing loss may 
use hearing aids, which consist of a microphone, amplifier, and speaker to help the 
wearer hear and communicate better.
Bridging Science and Society
Ready to Go Beyond 
We often do not realise how amazing our sense of 
hearing is. When sound enters the ear, it causes a thin 
membrane called the eardrum to vibrate (Fig. 10.24). 
Tiny bones quickly amplify these vibrations and the 
cochlea converts them into electrical signals that rush 
to the brain, which perceives them as sound.
Having two ears allows the brain to pinpoint the 
direction of the origin of sound. By comparing which 
ear hears the sound first, it figures out where the 
sound came from based on the tiny time gap between 
the two (often less than a thousandth of a second).
Animals hear in different ways. Snakes and fish 
sense vibrations through their bodies, while some 
insects have ear-like organs on their body parts.
Fig. 10.24: A schematic 
diagram of human ear
Cochlea
Ear drum

200
Exploration|Grade 9
A tone is a sound of a single frequency like that 
produced by a tuning fork or by oral whistling 
(Fig. 10.25a). A musical note like the sound 
produced by plucking a tanpura string or 
singing (Fig. 10.25b) is a combination of a lowest 
frequency called the fundamental and higher 
frequencies called overtones, which together 
create a rich and pleasant sound. Indian string 
instruments like the sarangi, sitar, and veena 
often use extra strings to enrich this combination. 
Even when different instruments like a 
flute, ektara, or tabla play the same note at the 
same loudness each sounds unique. This quality 
is called timbre, and comes from their shape, 
material and construction, which determine the 
pattern and intensity of the overtones. 
An octave is the interval between two notes where one has double the frequency 
of the other (for example, 200 Hz and 400 Hz), measured between their fundamental 
frequencies.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 10.25: Schematic representation 
of the sound produced by 
(a) a vibrating tuning fork or a person 
whistling, and (b) a child singing
(a)
(b)
Sir C. V. Raman won India’s first Nobel Prize in Science for 
discovering the Raman Effect in light. He also made important 
contributions to acoustics by studying Indian percussion 
instruments, such as the tabla and mridangam to understand 
how they produce rich and nuanced sounds.
Meet a Scientist
Indian drums like the tabla (Fig. 10.26) or mridangam 
have a black patch at the centre of the drum head 
membrane called the syaahi. This patch alters the 
vibration of the membrane, allowing these instruments 
to produce a rich variety of sounds. The syaahi also gives 
a level of tonal control rarely found in other drums.
Threads of Curiosity
Fig. 10.26: A tabla set
10.7 Reflection of Sound 
Sound waves can bounce off obstacles like solids or liquids and this is 
known as the reflection of sound. Sound follow the same laws of reflection 
as those of light which you have learned earlier. The directions in which 
the sound is incident and is thereafter reflected make equal angles with the 
normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence, with all three 
lying in the same plane. One of the most common examples of the reflection 
of sound is an echo.
Grade 8
Curiosity
Chapter 10

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
201
10.7.1 Echo
If we shout near a mountain, a cliff, or in a long corridor we may hear our 
voice again after some time. This is known as an echo. The sound reflects 
off the hard surface of a distant object and comes back to us.
Echoes aren’t heard everywhere. In a small room, wall reflections 
arrive too quickly for the brain to separate them from the original sound. 
If the time gap between two sounds reaching us is at least 0.1 s, we can 
hear them as separate sounds. If it is less than 0.1 s, then we cannot clearly 
distinguish between them. This time duration of 0.1 s can help us estimate 
the minimum distance of a reflecting surface from which we can hear 
an echo.
If we take the speed of sound as 340 m s–1, the distance travelled by 
sound in 0.1 s is 
distance = speed × time = 340 m s–1 × 0.1 s = 34.0 m
Note that 34 m would be the distance travelled by sound from the source 
to the reflecting surface and back. Hence, the minimum echo distance is 
half of this or 17 m. 
Echoes are stronger from hard and smooth surfaces that reflect sound. 
Soft surfaces like curtains tend to absorb sound, while rough surfaces 
scatter it in different directions, and in such cases it is not possible to hear 
the echoes clearly. 
Example 10.5: You clap in an empty corridor and hear an echo after 
0.5 s. If the speed of sound in air is 340 m s–1, calculate your distance 
from the wall.
Answer: Sound travels to the wall and back, thus,
−
×
×
1
340 m s
 0.5 s
distance from wall =
= 
 = 85 m
2
2
v t
  
12.	 An experiment is being set up that requires echoes to arrive at least 0.2 s 
after the emission of sound. What minimum distance should a reflecting 
surface be placed at? Assume the speed of sound to be 343 m s–1.
Pause and Ponder
10.7.2 Reverberation
Sometimes the emitted sound can undergo multiple reflections from 
the walls in a large hall or auditorium. Multiple reflections make sound 
persist after the source stops emitting sound, a phenomenon called 
reverberation. This occurs when sound reflections from surfaces arrive 
with a time difference less than 0.05 s.
Modern auditoriums and large concert halls are architecturally 
designed to have desirable reverberations, which allow the audience 
everywhere to hear speech, music, and other sounds clearly without any 
distortions. Sound absorbing panels, upholstered chairs, curtains and 
other soft, porous surfaces reduce reverberations by unwanted sources 
otherwise it could lead to a garbled sound.

202
Exploration|Grade 9
Threads of Curiosity
Medieval architects across the world, including in India, designed several monuments with deep 
acoustic insights. The renowned Whispering Gallery of the Gol Gumbaz in Bijapur, Karnataka, 
has a remarkable design that allows even a faint whisper to be heard multiple times across the 
large dome.
10.8  Ultrasonic and Infrasonic Waves, and their 
Applications
Sound waves with frequencies outside the human audible range have 
important applications in science, medicine, and technology.
Sound waves
Infrasonic waves
(less than 20 Hz)
Used for detecting natural events, such as 
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions
Used for detecting severe storms as such waves 
travel long distances through air and the Earth
Used for imaging internal organs without 
surgery (known as ultrasonography)
Used for breaking kidney stones into smaller 
pieces, which can then be passed out of the body
Used for ultrasonic welding and for cleaning 
delicate machine parts in industries
Used for detecting defects inside metal blocks 
during construction and industrial testing
Used for locating objects when sound waves get 
reflected off them
Human audible range 
(20 Hz to 20 kHz)
Ultrasonic waves
(more than 20 kHz)
Threads of Curiosity
10.8.1 Echolocation
Bats are nocturnal creatures that fly and 
search for their prey in the dark without 
colliding into objects. Most bats emit short 
bursts of ultrasonic waves which are 
reflected from nearby objects. By sensing 
the echoes the bat can determine the 
position of obstacles and prey (Fig. 10.27).
This 
ability 
to 
locate 
objects 
using reflected sound waves is called 
echolocation. Besides bats, animals such as 
dolphins, whales, and some birds also use 
echolocation for navigation and hunting.
Fig. 10.27: Echolocation by bats
Ultrasonic 
waves sent 
from the bat
Ultrasonic waves 
reflected from the 
prey
humans could 
detect ultrasonic 
waves like dogs 
can? What 
would be the 
advantages and 
disadvantages?
What if …

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
203
Humans have adapted 
the 
same 
principle 
in 
underwater 
exploration 
through 
sonar 
(sound 
navigation and ranging). 
In sonar, ultrasonic waves 
are sent into water and 
the reflected waves are 
analysed 
to 
determine 
the 
distance, 
direction, 
and speed of underwater 
objects, such as submarines 
or shipwrecks (Fig. 10.28).
Example 10.6: A naval sonar signal sent into seawater returns after 0.90 s. 
The speed of sound in seawater is 1530 m s–1. How far is the object?
Answer: Time taken for the signal to reach the object and travel back = 0.90 s
Time taken to reach the object is half of above time 
0.90 s
= 
 = 0.45 s
2
    
Thus, distance = speed × time = 1530 m s–1 × 0.45 s = 688.5 m
Drones (Fig. 10.29) and aircrafts produce characteristic 
sound from their motors and engines. Even when they are 
hard to see, the low frequency humming they generate can 
be detected using sensitive sound sensors. This method, 
called audio surveillance, helps monitor airspace for safety 
and security.
Bridging Science and Society
Fig. 10.29: A drone
13.	 Sound travels much farther in water than light, and thus, is used for various 
underwater applications. A sonar signal sent to find the depth of ocean takes 4 s 
to return. What is the depth of the ocean at that location if the speed of sound in 
seawater is 1500 m s–1?
Pause and Ponder
The Quest Continues …
Sound helps us explore places and phenomenon beyond human hearing. Space 
probes have recorded the first sounds from Mars, scientists are timing the sound of 
distant earthquakes to measure tiny changes in ocean temperature to understand 
the Earth’s changing climate, biologists are using the buzz of mosquitoes to identify 
disease-carrying mosquitoes, and researchers are listening to the tiny crackles 
produced by microbes in the soil to study soil health and biodiversity. As technology 
improves, sound is becoming an even more powerful tool to explore planets, living 
organisms, and the hidden activities of nature.
Fig. 10.28: Functioning of sonar
Ultrasonic 
waves sent 
from the ship
Ultrasonic waves 
reflected from the 
submarine

204
Exploration|Grade 9
1.	 Which observation best supports the idea that sound is a mechanical 
wave?
(i)	 Sound shows reflection
(ii)	 Sound needs a medium to propagate
(iii)	 Sound has frequency
(iv)	 Sound carries energy
2.	 For a sound wave propagating in a medium, increasing its frequency 
will increase its
(i)	 wavelength
(ii)	 speed
(iii)	 number of compressions per second
(iv)	 time period
Revise, Reflect, Refine
At a Glance
	y Sound is produced by vibrating objects.
	y Sound is a longitudinal mechanical wave that needs a medium to travel.
	y Sound can propagate through solids, liquids and gases.
	y In sound propagation, it is the density disturbance that travels and 
not the particles of the medium. The particles of the medium only 
vibrate about their mean positions as the sound wave passes. 
	y The distance between the two consecutive crests or two consecutive 
troughs is called the wavelength of a wave.
	y The change in density of the medium at a fixed point, from maximum 
to minimum, and then again to the maximum (or vice versa), makes 
one complete oscillation.
	y The number of density oscillations at a fixed point per unit time is 
the frequency of the sound wave.
	y The time taken for one complete density oscillation at a fixed point is 
defined as the time period of the wave.
	y The amplitude of a sound wave is the maximum change in air density 
in a compression (or a rarefaction) compared to the average density.
	y The amount of sound energy passing through a unit area 
perpendicular to the direction of the propagation of sound wave in 
a unit time is called the intensity of sound.
	y The speed of sound can be defined as the distance which a point on a 
wave, such as a crest (or a trough), travels in unit time. 
	y Echoes and reverberations are heard because of the reflection of 
sound from various surfaces.
	y Sound waves with frequency below 20 Hz are called infrasonic waves. 
Sound waves with frequency above 20 kHz are called ultrasonic 
waves.

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
205
3.	 If 20 compressions pass a point in 4 seconds, the frequency is
(i)	 80 Hz
(ii)	 5 Hz
(iii)	 10 Hz
(iv)	 0.2 Hz
4.	 In a room, the reflected sound reaches the ear 0.05 s after its production. 
Will it produce an echo or reverberation? Justify your answer.
5.	 Graphs representing two sound waves are given in Fig. 10.30. If the 
scales on the X and Y axes of the two graphs are the same, which 
of the two sound waves has (i) greater wavelength, and (ii) smaller 
amplitude?
Density
Distance
Density
Distance
Fig. 10.30
(a)
(b)
6.	 The sound waves emitted by three sources A, B and C are represented 
in Fig. 10.31. If the frequency of A is maximum and C is minimum, 
identify the corresponding curves, and mark A, B and C on them.
Distance
Density
Fig. 10.31
7.	 Draw a graph to represent a sound wave for which the density 
amplitude is 3 units and wavelength is 4 cm.
8.	 In a movie, while showing the explosion of a spacecraft in space, a 
flash of light is shown along with sound at the same time. What are the 
errors in this depiction?
9.	 A source produces a sound wave of wavelength 3.44 m. If the wave 
travels with a speed of 344 m s–1 find its time period. 
10.	 A ship searching for a sunken ship sent a sonar signal and detected 
an echo after 5 s. If ultrasonic wave travels at 1525 m s–1 in seawater, 
approximately how far down in the ocean is the wreckage of the 
sunken ship located?
11.	 A vehicle is fitted with an ultrasonic distance sensor as part of parking 
assistance system which provides echolocation, while the driver is 
reversing the vehicle. It emits ultrasonic wave (about 40 kHz) which 
is reflected by the obstacle. When the warning beep starts sounding 
at a distance of 1.2 m from the obstacle, how much time is taken by 
ultrasonic wave to travel to the obstacle and come back? Assume the 
speed of ultrasonic wave in air to be 345 m s–1.

206
Exploration|Grade 9
12.	 The speed of sound in air is about 331 m s–1 at 0 ºC and nearly 
344 m s–1 at 22 ºC. Roughly how much extra time will the sound of 
thunder take to travel a distance of 1720 m, if the air temperature 
changes from 22 ºC to 0 ºC? Assume that all other conditions remain 
unchanged.
13.	 The variation of density of medium for a sound wave propagating 
with a speed of 340 m s–1 is shown in Fig. 10.32. Calculate the 
wavelength and frequency of the sound wave.
Fig. 10.32
8 cm
14.	 The graphical representation of two sound waves A and B propagating 
at the same speed of 345 m s–1 is shown in Fig. 10.33. What is the 
wavelength of each of them? Also, calculate their frequencies.
15.	
Distance (cm)
Fig. 10.33
2.5
5.0
Density
0
B
A
Two identical sound sources are placed at A and B — one in air and 
one submerged in water (Fig. 10.34). Both produce sounds at the same 
time, which travel horizontally to the vertical side of the cliff and 
come back. If the time taken by the sound to return to A is 4.5 times 
than that of B, what is the ratio between the speeds of sound in air 
and water?
Fig. 10.34
B
A

Sound Waves: Characteristics and Applications
207
	y Many people use earphones extensively these days. Find out the 
research studies that might have been done to understand the impact 
of excessive use of earphones on hearing (if any). Also, find out how 
hearing is tested and what are the decibel ranges for defining mild, 
moderate and severe hearing loss. What are the government schemes 
for purchasing or fitting of aids or appliances and free cochlear 
implants? Write an article on your findings.
	y Make a cone using a poster paper or cardboard and adhesive tape. 
Cover a mobile phone that is playing music with the cone. Compare 
the loudness of the sound with and without the cone. You can also use 
another mobile phone with an app to measure the characteristics of the 
sound in both cases. Try experimenting with different shapes and record 
your observations. (This activity is to be facilitated by the teacher.)
	y How does the curved design of ceilings and walls behind the stage 
in concert and conference halls improve the quality of sound for the 
audience compared to flat surfaces? You may consult an architect or 
search it on the internet.
	y Carry out a simple activity to measure the speed of sound, along with a 
friend in a large open ground of size 200 m or more. (This activity is to 
be facilitated by the teacher.)
(i)	 Your friend stands at one end of the open ground with the 
balloons, while you stand at the other end with the stopwatch.
(ii)	 Signal your friend to burst one balloon. When you see the balloon 
burst, start the stopwatch. As soon as you hear the ‘pop’ sound of 
the bursting balloon, stop the timer and note down the reading.
(iii)	 Repeat this experiment multiple times and take the average value 
of the times noted.
(iv)	 Note the approximate distance between you and your friend using 
a map application on a mobile phone.
(v)	 Divide the distance measured with the average time to get the 
average speed of sound. What value of speed did you get from the 
experiment? Compare it with the speed of sound in air, which is 
typically about 346 m s–1 at 25 °C.
(vi)	 Why did you measure the time between ‘seeing’ and ‘hearing’ the 
balloon burst?
	y Explore the internet resources to explore the effect of humidity and 
temperature on the speed of sound. Some such resources are: 
(i)	 https://phet.colorado.edu/en/simulations/sound-waves/
(ii)	 https://musiclab.chromeexperiments.com/Experiments
(iii)	 https://phyphox.org/experiments
The Journey Beyond
